Title: OR Else: A Differentiable Trust Region for Policy Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18163v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 02:16:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# OR E LSE : A D IFFERENTIABLE TRUST REGION FOR POLICY 

# OPTIMIZATION 

Chinmay Rane 

Quantiphi Inc Marlborough, MA, 01752 

ranechinmay54@gmail.com 

Kanishka Tyagi 

Self Machines Inc San Francisco, California, 94402 

kanishkaugee@icloud.com 

Michael Manry 

Department of Electrical Engineering The University of Texas at Arlington Arlington, TX, 76010 

manry@uta.edu 

July 21, 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

PPO and the GRPO baseline studied here use clipped surrogate objectives whose favorable-direction saturation introduces an abrupt change in the scalar objective’s derivative. We ask whether Output Reset (OR), a smooth one-sided saturation rule, offers a useful alternative for large language model post-training. PPO-OR and GRPO-OR replace the clipped policy term with an OR squared-margin loss in rollout-relative token log-ratio space; the advantage sign determines the update direction, and a token contributes zero direct OR residual after crossing the favorable margin. We compare PPO-clip with PPO-OR under generalized advantage estimation (GAE), and GRPO with GRPO-OR under group-relative advantages, using Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct on Anthropic hh-rlhf with one shared reward model and three seeds per method. Under GAE, PPO-OR has a mean final training-time reward-model score 0.305 higher than PPO-clip, with a larger observed across-seed spread. Under group-relative advantages, GRPO-OR does not have a higher mean score, but shows a smaller observed spread, a near-zero terminal OR residual, and a declining overshoot fraction, while the matched GRPO clipped-objective trace remains variable. Both group-relative methods exhibit substantially larger rollout-to-current log-ratio displacement than the GAE methods, and OR does not consistently reduce it. Thus, OR changes optimization behavior in both matched comparisons, but the observed reward effect differs between them. At G = 2 , the GRPO-OR diagnostics do not translate into a reward-score gain. Whether larger groups change this outcome remains open. The reported scores are training-time reward-model measurements, not held-out human-preference performance. 

Code: https://github.com/ChicoR-Dr/PPO-GRPO-OR 

Keywords: RLHF, LLM post-training, policy optimization, PPO, GRPO, Output Reset, preference optimization arXiv:2607.18163v1 [cs.LG] 20 Jul 2026 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

# 1 Introduction 

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is widely used to adapt large language models to human pref-erences, building on preference-based reinforcement learning and subsequent work on human-feedback training for language models [1, 2, 3, 4]. Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) introduced an explicit KL-constrained policy update, while Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) replaced that second-order procedure with a clipped first-order surrogate [5, 6]. PPO remains a common optimization method for LLM post-training and uses the clipped surrogate objective 

LCLIP (θ) = ˆEt

h

min 



rt(θ) ˆAt, clip ( rt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt

i 

. (1) Here, rt(θ) = πθ (at | st)/π θold (at | st) is the probability ratio and ˆAt is an estimated advantage. For ˆAt > 0, the clipped branch removes further incentive to increase rt once rt > 1 + ϵ; for ˆAt < 0, it removes further incentive to decrease rt once rt < 1 − ϵ. The objective remains sensitive to movement in the opposite, disadvantageous direction. Clipping therefore suppresses further policy-loss updates after a sample has moved sufficiently far in the advantage-favored direction, but it does not impose a hard bound on the optimizer step, parameter displacement, KL divergence, or cumulative policy drift. The one-sided zero-gradient region is an intentional feature of PPO, not by itself an optimization pathology. The distinction examined in this work is the geometry of the transition into that region: although LCLIP is continuous, its derivative with respect to rt changes abruptly at the active clipping boundary. Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [7] replaces the learned value baseline with advantages computed from groups of responses to the same prompt, but retains the clipped probability-ratio surrogate and its piecewise gradient structure. We introduce PPO-OR and GRPO-OR, which replace the clipped policy term with an objective derived from Output Reset (OR) [8]. Conceptually, both methods retain the advantage-estimation machinery of their parent algorithms but change how each sampled token is acted upon: the sign of the advantage specifies whether the token should become more or less probable, and the direct OR update for that token stops once its log-probability change crosses a prescribed margin in the desired direction. PPO-OR uses GAE advantages and a learned value head, whereas GRPO-OR uses group-relative advantages without a critic. Adapting OR to policy optimization requires a scalar quantity that represents how the probability of a sampled token changes relative to the rollout policy. We use the per-token log-probability ratio 

ρt = log πθ (at | st) − log πθold (at | st), (2) which plays the role of the network output in the original OR formulation. For a nonzero advantage, OR assigns a target of +αOR when ˆAt > 0 and −αOR when ˆAt < 0. Once ρt crosses the corresponding boundary in the advantage-favored direction, the target is reset to the current log-ratio, producing zero residual and zero direct gradient from that sample. In forward-value form, the per-token objective is equivalent to the squared one-sided margin 

ℓOR ,t =

h

max 



0, α OR − sign( ˆAt)ρt

i 2

, ˆAt̸ = 0 ,

0, ˆAt = 0 .

(3) The OR-MSE gradient approaches zero continuously at the favorable saturation boundary and remains zero beyond it, although it is not globally bounded on the adverse side of the active branch. PPO-OR is therefore not merely a differentiable smoothing of PPO clipping. It simultaneously replaces the probability ratio rt with the log-ratio ρt,replaces the clipped surrogate with a squared one-sided margin, and uses the sign rather than the magnitude of ˆAt to determine the update direction. On the active branch, gradient descent on the OR-MSE term increases the selected token’s log-probability when ˆAt > 0 and decreases it when ˆAt < 0. Proposition 2 formalizes this sample-level directional property, while Proposition 1 establishes continuity of the first derivative at the favorable boundary. These properties do not imply that the aggregate update is identical to the full policy gradient or that optimizing the OR-MSE objective guarantees monotonic improvement in expected return. We evaluate the loss replacement in two advantage-estimation settings. PPO-clip and PPO-OR use generalized advan-tage estimation with a learned value head, whereas GRPO and the proposed GRPO-OR use group-relative advantages with G = 2 . The study therefore contains two matched within-family substitutions: PPO-clip versus PPO-OR under GAE, and GRPO versus GRPO-OR under group-relative advantages. Cross-family comparisons also reflect differ-ences in advantage estimation, value-model usage, response length, and response sampling, and are not interpreted as a controlled factorial decomposition. All four methods are evaluated on Anthropic hh-rlhf [4] using a Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct policy, a single shared frozen reward model, and three seeds. Because the experiments use a lightweight 2A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 reward model, a small group size, and a resource-constrained training configuration, the results characterize the eval-uated setting rather than establish general superiority over PPO or GRPO. Under GAE, the observed mean endpoint reward-model score increases from +0 .195 for PPO-clip to +0 .500 for PPO-OR, an absolute difference of +0 .305 ; the corresponding across-seed standard deviations are 0.110 and 0.158 . Under 

G = 2 group-relative advantages, the observed mean changes from +0 .488 for GRPO to +0 .457 for GRPO-OR, while the across-seed standard deviation decreases from 0.080 to 0.027 . Because the reward model is trained from pairwise differences and its numerical zero is not calibrated, these scores are interpreted comparatively rather than as positive or negative success thresholds. The recorded policy-objective trajectories also differ substantially: the clipped GRPO objective exhibits large excursions, whereas the GRPO-OR MSE remains close to zero on its own scale. These raw values are not directly comparable because the objectives have different definitions, signs, and numerical scales, so we treat them only as objective-specific training diagnostics. Policy drift provides a shared diagnostic across all four methods. Measured by the batch-averaged absolute log-ratio relative to the rollout policy, both group-relative methods exhibit substantially greater drift than the GAE-based methods, and GRPO-OR does not consistently reduce this drift relative to GRPO. This finding separates local gradient saturation from global policy control: OR suppresses the direct policy-loss contribution of a sample after it crosses its favorable boundary, but does not constrain cumulative movement caused by shared parameters, auxiliary losses, later minibatches, or changing advantage signs. Our contributions are: 1. We introduce PPO-OR and GRPO-OR , two LLM post-training variants that replace the clipped policy surrogate with an Output-Reset MSE objective in log-ratio space while retaining, respectively, GAE and group-relative advantage estimation. 2. We characterize the OR policy objective as a continuously differentiable, one-sided squared-margin loss. We establish that its sample-level update changes a selected token’s log-probability in the direction indicated by the sign of its estimated advantage and vanishes continuously at the favorable saturation boundary. 3. We conduct two matched, three-seed comparisons of clipping and OR: PPO-clip versus PPO-OR under GAE, and GRPO versus GRPO-OR under G = 2 group-relative advantages. In the evaluated setting, PPO-OR attains a higher observed mean endpoint reward-model score than PPO-clip, whereas GRPO-OR attains a slightly lower observed mean than GRPO but a smaller across-seed standard deviation. 4. We show that replacing clipping with OR does not resolve the large policy drift observed under G = 2 group-relative advantages. This negative result identifies cumulative policy drift, rather than boundary smoothness alone, as the principal unresolved problem exposed by the study (Sec. 4.3). 

# 2 Background and Related Work 

2.1 Policy Optimization in RLHF 

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) adapts a language-model policy using a scalar reward learned from human preference comparisons. A common large-scale pipeline consists of supervised fine-tuning, reward-model training on preference pairs, and online policy optimization against the learned reward [1, 2, 3, 4]. The policy-optimization stage is commonly expressed as a KL-regularized objective, 

J(θ) = E x∼D  

> y∼πθ(·| x)

[rϕ(x, y )] 

− β Ex∼D [DKL (πθ (· | x) ∥ πref (· | x))] ,

(4) where rϕ(x, y ) is the reward-model score and β controls regularization toward the frozen reference policy πref . For a response yi = ( yi, 1, . . . , y i,T i ) sampled from the rollout policy πθold , the sampled rollout-to-reference log-ratio at token t is 

kroll  

> i,t

= log πθold (yi,t | xi, y i,<t )

− log πref (yi,t | xi, y i,<t ) . (5) A standard terminal-reward construction assigns the reward-model score to the last generated token and applies the sampled reference penalty at each response position, 

r′ 

> i,t

= rϕ(xi, y i) 1[t = Ti] − βk roll  

> i,t

. (6) The exact placement of this reference term is an implementation choice; the GAE-based methods in this work use the shaped-reward form in Eq. (6), whereas the group-relative methods apply the sampled reference term directly in the optimization objective as described in Sec. 3.2. 3A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 At a more fundamental level, policy-gradient methods optimize expected return from sampled trajectories. REIN-FORCE uses the score-function estimator to weight action log-probability gradients by sampled returns [9], while the policy-gradient theorem provides the corresponding expected-gradient foundation for parameterized policies [10]. Advantage baselines and learned value functions are then used to reduce estimator variance without changing the intended policy-gradient direction. Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [5] controls policy movement through an explicit KL-constrained update, implemented using an approximate second-order procedure. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [6] replaces that constrained update with a clipped surrogate that supports multiple minibatch epochs using first-order optimization. In RLHF, PPO is typically paired with a learned value function and Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [11] to obtain token-level advantages ˆAi,t . The frozen reference policy πref and rollout policy πθold serve different purposes: 

πref anchors the model to the initial instruction-tuned policy, while πθold generates the current batch and defines the local importance ratio rt(θ) = πθ (at | st)/π θold (at | st) in the policy objective. Empirical analyses have shown that observed PPO and TRPO behavior depends substantially on implementation de-tails and on how the surrogate, advantage estimates, and value function behave in practice [12, 13]. Clipping also does not by itself impose the formal KL-constrained trust region used by TRPO [14]. In addition, PPO likelihood ratios and advantage estimates can induce heavy-tailed policy-gradient behavior [15]. More recent work has ana-lyzed stationary-point convergence of PPO-Clip under explicit assumptions [16] and developed alternative first-order proximal objectives with stronger control of probability-ratio movement [17]. These findings motivate studying the geometry of the policy objective without treating clipping as either a complete trust-region mechanism or an inherently defective design. Several alignment methods simplify or avoid this PPO configuration. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [18] trains directly on offline preference pairs without fitting an explicit reward model or sampling from the policy during fine-tuning. ReMax [19] and RLOO [20] instead retain online REINFORCE-style optimization while replacing PPO’s learned critic with trajectory-level variance-reduction baselines. These methods alter the data regime, baseline con-struction, or policy-optimization procedure. PPO-OR remains an online policy-optimization method and specifically replaces the PPO-style clipped policy term with a C1 squared one-sided margin in token-level log-ratio space; it does not introduce a formal trust-region constraint. 

2.2 Group-Relative Advantage Estimation 

Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) was introduced in DeepSeekMath [7]. It removes the learned value function and estimates response quality from multiple completions sampled for the same prompt. Given G responses with reward-model scores {rj }Gj=1 , the group-relative advantage for response i is 

ˆAGR  

> i

= ri − mean  {rj }Gj=1 



max  std  {rj }Gj=1 

 , δ  , (7) where δ > 0 prevents division by a zero or near-zero group standard deviation. A positive advantage indicates that a response scores above the group mean, while a negative advantage indicates that it scores below the mean. The response-level value is assigned to all valid generated tokens of that response. This construction removes critic training and storage, but the informativeness and variability of the estimate depend on group size, reward diversity, and the convention used to compute the group standard deviation. DeepSeek-R1 later applied group-relative reinforcement learning at larger scale for reasoning post-training [21]. Standard GRPO combines the group-relative estimator with a PPO-style clipped probability-ratio objective, so the advantage estimator and policy loss remain separable design choices. Subsequent methods modify other parts of this pipeline. DAPO [22] uses asymmetric clipping together with dynamic sampling, token-level loss aggregation, and overlength reward shaping to address entropy collapse, ineffective groups, and long-response training instability. Dr. GRPO [23] identifies an optimization bias that can favor increasing response length and proposes a corrected objective that improves token efficiency. In contrast, GRPO-OR retains group-relative advantages but replaces the clipped surrogate with the same OR policy loss used by PPO-OR. The experiments therefore compare the clipped and OR losses within the group-relative family rather than treating GRPO-OR as a new advantage estimator. 

2.3 Output Reset 

Output Reset (OR) [8] was introduced as a target-adjustment procedure for classifier training with mean squared error. For a training pattern p, let yp(ic) denote the pre-activation output for the correct class and yp(id) an output for an 4A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 Table 1: Conceptual correspondence between Output Reset in classification and PPO-OR in token-level policy op-timization. The parameter αOR > 0 is a one-sided margin in log-ratio space; it is not a hard bound on parameter movement, policy displacement, probability ratios, or KL divergence.                          

> OR classification PPO-OR Role
> Pre-activation output yp(i)Log-ratio ρtChange in the selected token’s log-probability relative to πθold
> Correct-class output ˆAt>0Favor an increase in the selected token’s probability Incorrect-class output ˆAt<0Favor a decrease in the selected token’s probability Fixed class target Signed target margin σtαOR Desired movement in the advantage-favored direction Output crosses its target σtρt> α OR Reset the target to ρt, producing zero residual No class-specific signal ˆAt= 0 Assign zero contribution from the OR policy-loss term

incorrect class. OR assigns 

tp(ic) = 

1, yp(ic) ≤ 1,yp(ic), yp(ic) > 1,tp(id) = 

0, yp(id) ≥ 0,yp(id), yp(id) < 0.

(8) Before an output crosses its desired boundary, its target remains fixed at 1 for the correct class or 0 for an incorrect class. After crossing the boundary in the desired direction, OR resets the target to the current output, which makes the corresponding MSE residual and direct gradient contribution zero during that evaluation. The present work transfers this target-reset construction from classifier outputs to token-level policy optimization. The classifier output becomes the log-probability change relative to the rollout policy, while the correct versus incorrect class distinction is replaced by the sign of the estimated advantage. This mapping yields a squared one-sided margin with continuous first derivative, as developed in Sec. 3. Unlike TRPO, it does not constrain KL divergence or parameter displacement; unlike PPO and GRPO, it does not use the clipped minimum surrogate; and unlike DPO, it remains an online reward-driven policy-optimization objective. 

# 3 PPO-OR 

PPO-OR replaces the clipped policy-loss term while retaining the remaining components of the corresponding policy-optimization pipeline. For each sampled token, the method measures the change in log-probability relative to the rollout policy and uses the sign of the estimated advantage to determine whether that token should become more or less probable. When this change crosses a prescribed margin in the advantage-favored direction, Output Reset assigns zero residual to the token. We first establish the correspondence between the original Output Reset formulation and token-level policy optimization, then define the PPO-OR and GRPO-OR objectives, and finally characterize the analytical properties of the resulting scalar loss. 

3.1 From Output Reset to Policy Optimization 

Adapting Output Reset from classification to policy optimization requires a scalar output and a desired direction for that output. For a sampled token at in state st, we use the per-token log-probability ratio 

ρt = log πθ (at | st) − log πθold (at | st), (9) which measures the change in the selected token’s log-probability relative to the rollout policy. We further define the advantage-sign variable 

σt = sign( ˆAt) ∈ {− 1, 0, +1 }. (10) A positive estimated advantage gives σt = +1 , indicating that the sampled token should become more probable, whereas a negative estimated advantage gives σt = −1, indicating that it should become less probable. When ˆAt = 0 ,the OR policy-loss term supplies no directional update for that token. Table 1 summarizes the resulting correspondence with the original classification formulation. The margin αOR is analogous to PPO’s clipping parameter only in the limited sense that both determine where favorable-direction saturation begins. PPO’s ratio-space interval [1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ] corresponds to 

[log(1 − ϵ), log(1 + ϵ)] (11) 5A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 in log-ratio space. The positive boundary has magnitude log(1 + ϵ), whereas the negative boundary has magnitude 

− log(1 −ϵ); a symmetric OR margin therefore cannot match both PPO clipping boundaries exactly with a single value of αOR . For example, when ϵ = 0 .2, the PPO boundaries are approximately [−0.223 , +0 .182] , whereas αOR = 0 .2

gives symmetric OR margins at [−0.2, +0 .2] .

3.2 PPO-OR and GRPO-OR Objectives 

Using σt = sign( ˆAt), the OR-adjusted target is 

τt =

σtαOR , σt̸ = 0 and σtρt ≤ αOR ,ρt, otherwise . (12) When the signed log-ratio has not crossed the favorable margin, the target remains fixed at σtαOR ; once σtρt > α OR ,the target follows the current log-ratio and the residual becomes zero. The same zero-residual branch is used when 

ˆAt = 0 . Let M denote the set of valid generated-token positions in a minibatch, excluding prompt and padding positions, and let NM = |M| . The OR policy loss is 

LOR (θ) = 1

NM

X

> (b,t )∈M

(ρb,t − sg[ τb,t ]) 2 , (13) where sg[ ·] denotes stop-gradient. Averaging over valid generated tokens prevents prompt and padding positions from affecting the normalization. The forward value of the corresponding per-token loss is equivalently 

ℓOR ,t =

[max (0 , α OR − σtρt)] 2 , σt̸ = 0 ,

0, σt = 0 . (14) This form makes the one-sided saturation geometry explicit: the loss and its derivative approach zero continuously at the favorable boundary and remain zero beyond it. The derivative is not globally bounded on the adverse side of the active branch; for example, when σt = +1 , the active branch contains every ρt < α OR , and the derivative magnitude grows without bound as ρt → −∞ . PPO-OR differs from PPO clipping in more than the smoothness of its saturation boundary. On its active branch, the PPO clipped surrogate weights a sample using the magnitude of its estimated advantage, whereas PPO-OR uses only σt to determine the target direction; its scalar gradient coefficient is set by the distance between ρt and the OR margin rather than by | ˆAt|. Because a nonzero advantage enters the loss only through its sign, PPO-OR is invariant to positive rescaling: 

ℓOR ,t (ρt, c ˆAt) = ℓOR ,t (ρt, ˆAt), c > 0, ˆAt̸ = 0 . (15) This property does not imply robustness to arbitrary advantage noise, because a perturbation that changes the advantage sign reverses the target direction. The sign-only construction is therefore a deliberate design choice, not a claim that advantage magnitudes are generally uninformative or that sign-only weighting is universally preferable. For PPO-OR, the signs σb,t are obtained from token-level GAE advantages and a learned value function. The reference-policy contribution is incorporated into the shaped rewards before GAE is computed. For a generated token, define the rollout-time sampled reference log-ratio 

kroll  

> b,t

= log πθold (ab,t | sb,t ) − log πref (ab,t | sb,t ), (16) and the shaped reward 

r′ 

> b,t

= rRM ,b 1[t = Tb] − βk roll  

> b,t

, (17) where rRM ,b is the response-level reward-model score and Tb is the final valid generated position. The resulting training loss is 

LPPO -OR (θ, ϕ ) = LOR (θ) + c1Lvalue (ϕ) − c2HM[πθ ], (18) where Lvalue is the unclipped critic mean-squared error against the GAE return targets, HM[πθ ] is the entropy averaged over valid generated positions, and ϕ denotes the value-function parameters. No additional direct reference-policy term appears in Eq. (18), because the penalty has already contributed to the rewards from which the returns and GAE advantages were constructed. GRPO-OR uses the same OR policy loss but replaces the token-level GAE advantage with the response-level group-relative advantage from Eq. (7). For response i, the sign 

σGR  

> i

= sign 

 ˆAGR 

> i



(19) 6A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 is assigned to every valid generated token belonging to that response; groups with exactly zero reward variance are excluded from the policy update. This changes the source and granularity of the advantage signal while leaving the OR target construction unchanged. In the group-relative implementation, reference-policy regularization is applied directly to the optimization loss through the sampled current-to-reference log-ratio 

kcur  

> b,t

(θ) = log πθ (ab,t | sb,t ) − log πref (ab,t | sb,t ) (20) and its masked mean 

Lref (θ) = 1

NM

X

> (b,t )∈M

kcur  

> b,t

(θ). (21) This quantity is a sampled-token reference log-ratio penalty rather than the full categorical KL over the vocabulary at every state. The GRPO-OR training loss is 

LGRPO -OR (θ) = LOR (θ) + βL ref (θ) − c2HM[πθ ]. (22) GRPO-OR contains no value-loss term because it does not train a critic, and the direct reference-policy contribu-tion is applied once rather than also being included in the reward-model scores used to construct the group-relative advantages. 

3.3 Analytical Properties 

The following propositions characterize the scalar OR policy loss. They do not establish a hard trust region, a mono-tonic expected-return guarantee, or a bound on the aggregate neural-network update. 

Proposition 1 (One-sided saturation and smoothness) . For a fixed nonzero advantage sign σt, the per-token loss in Eq. (14) is positive when σtρt < α OR and zero when σtρt ≥ αOR . Its derivative is 

∂ℓ OR ,t 

∂ρ t

=

−2σt (αOR − σtρt) , σtρt < α OR ,

0, σtρt ≥ αOR . (23) 

The derivative approaches zero continuously at the favorable boundary and remains zero beyond it. The scalar loss is therefore C1 but not C2 at σtρt = αOR . On the strict overshoot branch, τt = ρt, so the corresponding token contributes zero residual and zero direct OR policy-loss gradient during that evaluation. Proof. For σt̸ = 0 , Eq. (14) reduces to ℓOR ,t = [max(0 , α OR − σtρt)] 2. When σtρt < α OR , differentiating the active squared term gives the first branch of Eq. (23); when σtρt > α OR , the loss is identically zero and hence has zero derivative. At σtρt = αOR , the active-branch derivative also equals zero, so the first derivative is continuous while the second derivative changes from 2 on the active branch to 0 on the saturated branch. For strict overshoot, Eq. (12) assigns τt = ρt, yielding zero residual and zero direct gradient from that token-level term. 

Proposition 2 (Sample-level update direction) . On the active branch, the negative gradient of an individual PPO-OR policy-loss term is a positive scalar multiple of σt∇θ log πθ (at | st). Consequently, the isolated steepest-descent direction favors increasing the selected token’s log-probability when ˆAt > 0 and decreasing it when ˆAt < 0.Proof. Because the rollout policy is fixed during the optimization epochs, its log-probability contributes no parameter gradient. On the active branch, 

−∇ θ ℓOR ,t = 2 σt (αOR − σtρt) ∇θ log πθ (at | st). (24) The scalar factor 2( αOR − σtρt) is positive. Equivalently, with dt = −∇ θ ℓOR ,t , the directional derivative of the selected token’s log-probability is 

∇θ log πθ (at | st)⊤dt = 2 σt (αOR − σtρt)

× ∥∇ θ log πθ (at | st)∥22 . (25) Except at stationary points where the log-probability gradient is zero, its sign is determined by σt, which proves the stated sample-level direction. Proposition 1 characterizes one-sided saturation of the scalar loss, and Proposition 2 characterizes the isolated steepest-descent direction of one token-level term. Neither describes the exact AdamW update used in the experiments, which also depends on optimizer state, weight decay, other tokens, and the value, entropy, and reference-policy components of the minibatch objective. Because PPO-OR discards | ˆAt| and reweights samples according to their distance from the OR margin, its aggregate minibatch gradient is not generally identical or collinear with the full magnitude-weighted policy gradient. The results above therefore provide neither a monotonic expected-return guarantee nor a bound on parameter displacement, probability-ratio movement, or KL divergence. 7A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

All experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Ti GPU with 16.7 GB of reported avail-able VRAM. We used PyTorch 2.12 with bfloat16 precision for the trainable policy and 4-bit NormalFloat quantiza-tion through BitsAndBytes [24] for the frozen reference model and reward-model backbone. Policy adaptation used PEFT [25] and LoRA [26]. Each method was evaluated with seeds 42, 43, and 44 on the same machine and with the same frozen reward model. Sharing one scorer removes reward-model variation across policy-optimization runs, but the four configurations do not form a fully controlled factorial comparison because the GAE and group-relative families differ in advantage estimation, critic usage, sampling procedure, and response length. We therefore inter-pret the study as two matched within-family comparisons: PPO-clip versus PPO-OR under GAE, and GRPO versus GRPO-OR under group-relative advantages. The trainable policy was initialized from meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct ; we did not train a new supervised fine-tuning checkpoint. A frozen copy of the same checkpoint served as the reference policy πref , while πθold denotes the rollout-policy snapshot associated with the current rollout batch. Anthropic hh-rlhf [4] was used for both reward-model training and policy optimization. Preference pairs were used for the former, whereas the human turn alone was used as the generation prompt for the latter. Reusing one dataset source for both phases is a deliberate simplification and may allow overlap between reward-model training prompts and policy-optimization prompts; this limitation is discussed in Sec. 5.3. 

4.1.1 Reward Model Training 

The reward model consists of a frozen, 4-bit quantized Llama-3.2-1B backbone and a trainable one-hidden-layer MLP head, 

Linear(2048 , 512) → ReLU → Dropout(0 .1) → Linear(512 , 1) (26) The head contains approximately one million trainable parameters, and only these parameters receive gradients. For each prompt–response sequence, the hidden state at the final non-padding position is passed through the MLP to produce the scalar score rϕ(x, y ).For a preferred response y+ and a rejected response y− to the same prompt x, the reward head is trained with the Bradley–Terry loss [27] 

LBT = − log σ  rϕ(x, y +) − rϕ(x, y −) . (27) The loss equals log 2 ≈ 0.693 when the two responses receive equal scores and approaches zero as the preferred response receives an increasingly larger score. Because the objective depends only on score differences, the numerical zero of the learned reward scale is not identified. We trained the reward head on 8,000 preference pairs for three epochs using a batch size of 8, AdamW with learning rate 2 × 10 −4, and cosine annealing. Prompt–response sequences were truncated or padded to a maximum length of 512 tokens. Pairwise preference accuracy was computed as 

Acc pair = 1

Neval 

> Neval

X

> i=1

1 rϕ(xi, y + 

> i

) > r ϕ(xi, y − 

> i

) . (28) The resulting checkpoint achieved 60–61% pairwise accuracy (in-sample) and was then frozen and reused for every policy-optimization run. 

4.1.2 Policy Optimization 

All four methods were trained for 500 rollout steps using four prompts per rollout batch, four optimization epochs per batch, and learning rate 10 −5. Generation used temperature 0.9 and top-p 0.9 [28]. The reference coefficient was β = 0 .05 , and the entropy coefficient was c2 = 0 .01 . The GAE-based methods additionally used γ = 1 .0,

λ = 0 .95 , and value-loss coefficient c1 = 0 .1. Optimization used AdamW with a cosine schedule and a warmup period equal to 10% of the total rollout steps. Policy weights were updated through LoRA adapters with rank r = 16 

and scaling parameter αLoRA = 32 , applied to q_proj and v_proj ; this yielded approximately four million trainable policy parameters out of 1.2 billion total parameters. Table 2 summarizes the method-specific settings. PPO-clip and PPO-OR use a learned value head Linear(2048 , 1) 

initialized from N (0 , 0.01) and an unclipped mean-squared value objective. Their sampled reference-policy term is 8A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

Algorithm 1 Reward-model training on Anthropic hh-rlhf 

Require: Preference set D = {(xi, y + 

> i

, y − 

> i

)}8000  

> i=1

, frozen backbone fLM , reward head hψ 

> 1:

for epoch e = 1 , . . . , 3 do  

> 2:

for minibatch B ⊂ D , |B| = 8 do  

> 3:

Tokenize (x, y +) and (x, y −) to maximum length 512  

> 4:

h+ ← fLM (x, y +)[ last non-padding position ] 

> 5:

h− ← fLM (x, y −)[ last non-padding position ] 

> 6:

r+ ← hψ (h+) and r− ← hψ (h−) 

> 7:

LBT ← −|B| −1 P 

> (x,y +,y −)∈B

log σ(r+ − r−) 

> 8:

Update ψ using AdamW  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return frozen reward model rϕ ≡ hψ ◦ fLM 

Table 2: Policy-optimization configurations. The matched comparisons replace only the policy-loss term within each advantage family. The GAE and group-relative families additionally differ in critic usage, sampling procedure, and maximum response length.                             

> Method Advantage and critic Policy term Reference regularization Response cap
> PPO-clip Token-level GAE with learned value head Clipped surrogate, Eq. (1) Sampled reference term incorporated into shaped rewards before GAE 128 tokens PPO-OR Token-level GAE with learned value head OR loss, Eq. (13) Sampled reference term incorporated into shaped rewards before GAE 128 tokens GRPO Group-relative response ad-vantage with G= 2 ; no critic Clipped surrogate, Eq. (1) Sampled current-to-reference penalty added directly to the loss 64 tokens GRPO-OR Group-relative response ad-vantage with G= 2 ; no critic OR loss, Eq. (13) Sampled current-to-reference penalty added directly to the loss 64 tokens

incorporated into the shaped rewards before GAE, as defined in Sec. 3.2; no second direct reference penalty is added to their optimization loss. PPO-clip uses ϵ = 0 .2, whereas PPO-OR uses αOR = 0 .2. These settings use the same nominal numerical value but not identical boundaries: PPO clipping maps to [log(0 .8) , log(1 .2)] ≈ [−0.223 , +0 .182] 

in log-ratio space, whereas PPO-OR uses symmetric margins at [−0.2, +0 .2] .For GRPO and GRPO-OR, two responses were generated for each prompt. The implementation computes a group-relative advantage from the two reward-model scores, clamps the computed group standard deviation below at 10 −4,and excludes groups with exactly zero reward variance from the policy update. For every non-tied G = 2 group, the two responses therefore receive opposite advantage signs, although their normalized magnitudes depend on the standard-deviation convention used by the installed PyTorch version. This distinction affects the magnitude-weighted GRPO clipped surrogate, whereas GRPO-OR uses only the signs to construct its targets. The group-relative methods compute advantages from the reward-model scores and add the sampled current-to-reference penalty directly to the optimization loss, as defined in Sec. 3.2. The group size G = 2 was the largest setting that fit within the available GPU memory under the implemented pipeline. During GRPO and GRPO-OR training, the reward-model backbone remained on the CPU during generation and policy updates and was moved to the GPU only for reward scoring. This offloading procedure and all other within-family settings were held fixed between GRPO and GRPO-OR. The smaller group size should be treated as a hardware-constrained experimental setting rather than as equivalent to the larger groups used in the original GRPO experiments [21]. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 3 summarizes the final training-time reward-model scores and the principal optimization diagnostics for all four methods. Each entry is based on seeds 42, 43, and 44 evaluated with the same frozen reward model. We define the final score as the last logged reward-model score at rollout step 500 for each seed and report the mean and standard deviation across the three seeds. The policy-loss and drift descriptors are approximate values read from the terminal regions of the corresponding multi-seed mean curves and are included only as descriptive diagnostics. Because the GAE and group-relative configurations differ in advantage estimation, critic usage, sampling procedure, and response 9A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

Algorithm 2 Policy optimization for the GAE and group-relative variants 

Require: Frozen reward model rϕ, frozen reference policy πref , trainable policy πθ , prompt set P, method m 

> 1:

Initialize πθ from Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct  

> 2:

Initialize πref as a frozen copy of the same checkpoint  

> 3:

Attach LoRA with r = 16 and αLoRA = 32 to q_proj and v_proj  

> 4:

for rollout step k = 1 , . . . , 500 do  

> 5:

Sample prompts {xi}Bi=1 with B = 4  

> 6:

Set πθold to the rollout-policy snapshot for this batch  

> 7:

if m ∈ { PPO-clip , PPO-OR } then  

> 8:

Generate one response per prompt with maximum length 128  

> 9:

Record rollout-policy and reference-policy log-probabilities  

> 10:

Record value predictions and terminal reward-model scores  

> 11:

Construct reference-shaped rewards as in Sec. 3.2  

> 12:

Compute GAE advantages and return targets with γ = 1 .0 and λ = 0 .95  

> 13:

else  

> 14:

Generate G = 2 responses per prompt with maximum length 64  

> 15:

Record rollout-policy and reference-policy log-probabilities  

> 16:

Compute response-level reward-model scores  

> 17:

Compute group-relative advantages using Eq. (7)  

> 18:

Exclude groups with exactly zero reward variance  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

for optimization epoch e = 1 , . . . , 4 do  

> 21:

Evaluate current-policy log-probabilities on valid response tokens  

> 22:

if m ∈ { PPO-OR , GRPO-OR } then  

> 23:

Lpolicy ← LOR using Eq. (13)  

> 24:

else  

> 25:

Lpolicy ← Lclip using Eq. (1)  

> 26:

end if  

> 27:

if m ∈ { PPO-clip , PPO-OR } then  

> 28:

Compute Lvalue  

> 29:

L ← L policy + 0 .1Lvalue − 0.01 Lentropy  

> 30:

else  

> 31:

Compute Lref using Eq. (21)  

> 32:

L ← L policy + 0 .05 Lref − 0.01 Lentropy  

> 33:

end if  

> 34:

Update LoRA parameters and, for GAE methods, the value head using AdamW  

> 35:

end for  

> 36:

end for 

length, the primary comparisons are PPO-clip versus PPO-OR and GRPO versus GRPO-OR. Cross-family rankings are reported for completeness but should not be interpreted as a controlled factorial comparison. Across the four configurations, PPO-OR has the highest observed mean final score, 0.500 ± 0.158 , followed by GRPO at 0.488 ± 0.080 , GRPO-OR at 0.457 ± 0.027 , and PPO-clip at 0.195 ± 0.110 . Figure 1 shows that PPO-OR separates from PPO-clip during training and reaches the highest mean terminal score, but it also has the largest across-seed standard deviation. GRPO-OR has the smallest reported standard deviation, although three seeds are insufficient to support a general variance-reduction claim. These values are scores from the same frozen reward model on training-time rollouts; they should not be interpreted as calibrated utility values or held-out human preference rates. Within the GAE family, replacing the clipped surrogate with OR changes the observed mean final score from 0.195 

to 0.500 , an absolute difference of 0.305 reward-score units. The observed across-seed standard deviation changes from 0.110 to 0.158 . Thus, the higher observed mean is not accompanied by a smaller seed-to-seed spread. The comparison shows a higher observed mean for PPO-OR than for the matched PPO-clip configuration under the present model, dataset, training budget, and hyperparameters; it does not by itself identify the mechanism responsible for the difference or establish generalization outside this setting. Within the group-relative family, replacing the clipped surrogate with OR changes the mean final score from 0.488 to 

0.457 , an absolute difference of −0.031 . At the same time, the across-seed standard deviation decreases from 0.080 to 

0.027 , making the observed spread approximately three times smaller. GRPO-OR therefore does not improve the mean 10 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 Table 3: Main results on Anthropic hh-rlhf across three seeds. Final score is the mean and standard deviation of the last logged training-time reward-model score at rollout step 500. Policy-loss and drift entries are approximate terminal-region diagnostics read from the multi-seed mean curves. Raw policy-loss magnitudes are objective-specific and are not directly comparable across the clipped-surrogate and OR-MSE objectives.                                      

> Method Advantage family Final score Terminal policy-loss behavior Mean |ρt|drift
> PPO-clip [6] GAE 0.195 ±0.110 Near zero over the terminal region ≈0.3–0.5
> PPO-OR GAE 0.500 ±0.158 Near zero over the terminal region ≈0.3–0.5
> GRPO [7] Group-relative 0.488 ±0.080 Large and highly variable; per-seed peaks reach the hundreds
> ≈5–13
> GRPO-OR Group-relative 0.457 ±0.027 Near zero over the terminal region ≈5–13

Figure 1: Training-time reward-model score over 500 rollout steps for all four methods, with three seeds per method. Curves are smoothed with a moving window of 10 steps, and shaded regions denote ±1 standard deviation across seeds. The shared reward scale supports descriptive within-experiment comparisons, but its numerical zero is not calibrated as a success threshold. score in this matched comparison, but its three runs are more tightly clustered. Because the estimate is based on only three seeds, the reduced dispersion is reported as a descriptive observation rather than a general stability guarantee. Figure 2 adds an optimization view that is not captured by the final reward-model scores. PPO-clip, PPO-OR, and GRPO-OR remain near zero on their respective plotted loss scales, whereas the GRPO trace is much larger and has a wide cross-seed band, with individual peaks in the hundreds. This numerical difference does not, by itself, show that one objective is better conditioned than another because the clipped surrogate and OR loss have different units, normalizations, and gradient coefficients. It nevertheless shows that the strong final score obtained by GRPO coexists with a large and variable objective-specific loss trace. Conversely, the lower PPO-clip final score is not accompanied by an exploding raw loss. Any explanation based on clipping activity or OR branch occupancy must therefore be supported by the token-level diagnostics analyzed in Sec. 4.3, rather than inferred from raw loss magnitude alone. The policy-drift traces provide a second distinction between the two advantage families. The GAE-based methods remain in an approximate terminal range of |ρt| ≈ 0.3–0.5, whereas GRPO and GRPO-OR remain mostly between approximately 5 and 13 . For GRPO, the logged mean reaches the display cap of 15 during roughly the first 130 rollout steps before decreasing and continuing to oscillate at a substantially higher level than the GAE methods. The same order of drift is observed for GRPO-OR, indicating that replacing the group-relative clipped surrogate with OR does not remove the large cross-family difference in rollout-to-current policy displacement. These drift values are examined in detail in Sec. 4.3 and should not be interpreted as formal KL bounds. 11 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

Figure 2: Policy-loss traces over training for three seeds per method; shaded regions denote ±1 standard deviation. The left panel shows the full plotted range, and the right panel enlarges the near-zero region. GRPO has substantially larger and more variable logged loss values than the other configurations. Absolute values across the clipped-surrogate and OR-MSE objectives are not directly comparable, so the figure is interpreted as an objective-specific optimization diagnostic rather than a common performance scale. Figure 3 summarizes the two matched substitutions without treating them as a single factorial effect. The GAE comparison shows a +0 .305 difference in mean final score when the clipped surrogate is replaced by OR, together with a +0 .048 increase in the observed standard deviation. The group-relative comparison shows a −0.031 difference in mean final score and a −0.053 difference in standard deviation. The two comparisons therefore exhibit different observed patterns: higher mean score with greater dispersion under GAE, and a similar but slightly lower mean with smaller dispersion under the group-relative configuration. The present experiment does not isolate an interaction between the loss and advantage estimator, because the two families are not otherwise matched. 

4.3 Training Dynamics 

We examine three complementary diagnostics: occupancy of the OR overshoot branch, the magnitude of the logged OR targets, and the sampled rollout-to-current policy displacement. These quantities characterize different aspects of training and should not be interpreted as interchangeable measures of convergence or stability. At rollout step k, let 

Mk denote the valid generated-token positions. For an OR-based method, we define the overshoot fraction as 

f (k)over = 1

|M k|

X

> (b,t )∈M k

1[σb,t ̸ = 0 and σb,t ρb,t > α OR ] . (29) A token counted by Eq. (29) lies beyond the favorable OR margin and therefore contributes zero direct residual to LOR 

during that evaluation. A larger value consequently means that a larger fraction of sampled tokens occupies the strict zero-residual overshoot branch; it does not mean that OR is applying a larger corrective gradient. Conversely, a value near zero does not by itself establish policy convergence, because branch occupancy also depends on the sampled responses, current advantage signs, and the rollout-policy snapshot. The implementation additionally logged a squared-target diagnostic, shown as “OR energy” in the original training logs. To match the quantity computed by the implementation, we define it as 

E(k) 

> τ

= 1

|M k|

X

> (b,t )∈M k

τ 2

> b,t

. (30) This is the mean squared magnitude of the logged OR target, not the mean-squared residual (ρ − τ )2 used by the policy loss. It is therefore reported only as an implementation-specific target-magnitude diagnostic and not as a second loss or a convergence certificate. Figure 4 shows different branch-occupancy patterns for the two OR variants. For PPO-OR, the mean overshoot fraction decreases from approximately 0.10 near the start of training to approximately 0.005 by rollout steps 150 –200 

and remains low thereafter. For GRPO-OR, it begins near 0.14 , declines more gradually, and remains near 0.03 with visible cross-seed variation through step 500. The squared-target diagnostic follows a similar descriptive separation: 12 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

Figure 3: Paired visualization of the policy-loss substitution within each advantage family, using three seeds and ±1

standard-deviation bands. Under GAE, PPO-OR has a higher observed mean final score than PPO-clip. Under group-relative advantages, GRPO-OR has a slightly lower mean final score but a smaller observed cross-seed spread than GRPO. The layout is not a controlled 2 × 2 factorial ablation because the two advantage families also differ in critic usage, response length, and sampling procedure. it remains close to zero on the plotted scale for PPO-OR, whereas for GRPO-OR it decreases from approximately 

4–5 to a noisy terminal range of approximately 1–1.5. These observations show that the two OR configurations spend different fractions of training on the strict overshoot branch and produce different target magnitudes. They do not, by themselves, establish that either policy has converged or identify the advantage estimator as the cause, because the GAE and group-relative configurations also differ in critic usage, response length, and group sampling. The objective-specific loss traces in Fig. 2 provide a related but distinct view. GRPO-OR’s logged OR loss approaches a near-zero terminal region, while the GRPO clipped-surrogate trace remains large and highly variable, with individual peaks in the hundreds. Because these methods optimize losses with different units, normalizations, and gradient coefficients, this numerical contrast cannot be interpreted as a common-scale reduction in policy loss or as proof that OR removes a particular instability mechanism. It does show that the OR residual remains small under the GRPO-OR objective while the matched GRPO run retains a large objective-specific trace. Under the OR loss, a small value can arise because active tokens are close to their signed margins, because tokens occupy the zero-residual branch, or from a combination of both; Fig. 4 is needed to distinguish these cases descriptively. For the displacement diagnostic, we use the valid-token mean absolute log-ratio between the current policy and the rollout policy, 

D(k)roll = 1

|M k|

X

> (b,t )∈M k

ρb,t ,ρb,t = log πθ (ab,t | sb,t ) − log πθold (ab,t | sb,t ).

(31) 13 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

Figure 4: OR diagnostics over training for PPO-OR and GRPO-OR, with three seeds and ±1 standard-deviation bands. Left: overshoot fraction from Eq. (29). Tokens on this branch have zero direct OR residual at that evaluation. Right: mean squared OR target magnitude from Eq. (30), labeled “OR energy” in the training logs and capped at 25 for display. Neither quantity is a formal convergence measure or a bound on policy drift. 

Figure 5: Sampled rollout-to-current policy displacement from Eq. (31), averaged over valid generated tokens for three seeds. Curves show multi-seed means with ±1 standard-deviation bands and are capped at 15 for display; values at the cap may represent larger uncapped displacement. The metric is an absolute sampled log-ratio, not a KL divergence or a trust-region bound. The plotted value is capped at 15 for readability. This sampled absolute log-ratio is not a categorical KL divergence and does not measure displacement from the frozen reference policy. Figure 5 separates the GAE and group-relative configurations more sharply than the final reward-model scores. PPO-clip and PPO-OR remain below approximately 0.5 throughout most of training and end in the approximate range 

0.3–0.5. GRPO reaches the display cap during roughly the first 130 rollout steps and subsequently oscillates mostly between approximately 5 and 13 . GRPO-OR remains on the same order and exceeds GRPO during portions of training rather than consistently reducing the displacement. Thus, replacing the clipped surrogate with OR does not remove the large rollout-to-current policy movement observed in the group-relative configuration. 14 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 Table 4: Runtime and steady-state GPU-memory measurements for the implemented training pipelines. Step times were recorded from one representative run per method; total runtime includes run-level overhead. Steady-state VRAM values summarize the ranges observed in Fig. 6.                                

> Method Logged time/step Total time Steady-state VRAM
> PPO-OR 1.3s22 min ≈5.5–6GB PPO-clip 4.4s42 min ≈5.5–6GB GRPO 8.9s77 min ≈4GB GRPO-OR 4.6s49 min ≈4GB

Figure 6: Allocated GPU memory over 500 rollout steps for three seeds per method. Curves show the seed mean and shaded regions show ±1 standard deviation. All four pipelines remain below the reported 16.7 GB device budget. The narrow bands indicate limited run-to-run variation in the logged memory allocation under the fixed architecture and batch settings. This result is consistent with the scope of the analytical properties in Sec. 3.3. Proposition 1 states that a token on the favorable saturated branch contributes zero direct OR residual; it does not impose a hard trust region or bound the cumulative optimizer update, and the active-branch derivative remains unbounded in the adverse direction. The realized update also combines gradients from other tokens, entropy and reference-policy terms, and, for PPO-OR, the value objective. Moreover, rollout batches and advantage signs change across iterations. The training dynamics therefore distinguish sample-level one-sided saturation from policy-level proximity: OR changes when individual token losses become inactive, but the present results do not show that it constrains aggregate policy displacement. 

4.4 Runtime and Memory Usage 

We report wall-clock and GPU-memory measurements for the implemented training pipelines rather than asymptotic computational complexity. Table 4 summarizes the measured runtime of one representative run for each method. The logged step time covers the timed training-step region, whereas total wall-clock time also includes model initializa-tion, reward-model transfers, logging, checkpointing, and other run-level overhead. The two timing columns should therefore not be multiplied directly. Because these measurements were obtained from one run per method rather than averaged across seeds, they should be interpreted as descriptive measurements of this implementation, not as a hardware-independent ranking of the four objectives. Under this implementation, PPO-OR had the lowest measured step time and total runtime, followed by PPO-clip and GRPO-OR, while GRPO required the longest run. The group-relative pipelines generate two responses per prompt and repeatedly move the reward-model backbone between CPU and GPU, which contributes additional generation and transfer overhead. The substantial timing differences between the clipped and OR variants may also reflect implemen-tation details outside the scalar policy objective, including tensor construction, masking, logging, and the numerical behavior of each training path. We therefore do not claim that replacing the clipped surrogate with OR necessarily yields the same runtime ordering in other implementations. Figure 6 shows a short-lived peak of approximately 10 GB during initialization, when the policy, reference, and reward-model components are loaded before the steady-state execution pattern is established. During training, PPO-15 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 OR and PPO-clip allocate approximately 5.5–6 GB, whereas GRPO and GRPO-OR allocate approximately 4 GB. The lower steady-state GPU allocation of the group-relative pipelines is due to the implemented CPU offloading of the reward-model backbone and their shorter 64-token response cap; it should not be interpreted as an intrinsic memory advantage of group-relative optimization. The GAE-based methods retain the reward-model components on the GPU and generate up to 128 response tokens. The available memory constrained the group-relative experiments to G = 2 . Under the implemented pipeline, this was the largest group size that could be run reliably together with four prompts per rollout batch. An engineering extrapolation from the observed allocations suggested that G = 4 could approach approximately 13 GB of peak usage and might be feasible with additional memory optimization, whereas G = 8 could require approximately 18–20 GB and would exceed the available budget. These are planning estimates rather than direct end-to-end measurements and do not include every possible memory optimization. Larger groups would change the group-relative advantage estimates, but whether they would reduce the policy-displacement behavior reported in Sec. 4.3 remains an empirical question. 

# 5 Discussion 

5.1 Interpreting the Observed Effects of OR 

The central result is not that OR uniformly stabilizes policy optimization, but that its observed effect depends on the surrounding advantage-estimation pipeline and on the diagnostic being examined. In the matched GAE comparison, PPO-OR has a higher observed mean final training-time reward-model score than PPO-clip, 0.500 ± 0.158 versus 

0.195 ± 0.110 , an absolute difference of 0.305 score units; the observed cross-seed standard deviation is also larger by 0.048 . In the matched group-relative comparison, replacing the clipped surrogate with OR changes the mean score from 0.488 ± 0.080 to 0.457 ± 0.027 , a difference of −0.031 , while the observed standard deviation decreases by 

0.053 . GRPO-OR also produces a small OR residual over the terminal region, whereas the matched GRPO run has a large and variable clipped-surrogate trace. Because the two methods optimize objectives with different units and gradient coefficients, this contrast is an objective-specific training observation rather than a common-scale reduction in policy loss. Most importantly, GRPO-OR does not consistently reduce the large rollout-to-current displacement of the group-relative configuration. These results separate three questions that are often grouped under the single label of training stability: whether the policy obtains a high score under the learned reward model, whether the optimized scalar objective has a well-behaved numerical trace, and whether the updated policy remains close to the rollout policy. The three quantities do not move together in our experiments. PPO-clip has a near-zero terminal loss trace but the lowest mean reward-model score. GRPO has a strong mean final score despite a large objective-specific trace and much larger sampled policy displacement than the GAE methods. GRPO-OR has a small OR residual but remains on the same order of displacement as GRPO. Reward, raw loss, and policy displacement therefore provide complementary rather than interchangeable evidence. This interpretation also clarifies the relation of PPO-OR to prior policy-optimization methods. PPO and GRPO use a clipped probability-ratio surrogate [6, 7], whereas OR originated as a target-reset procedure for MSE-based classifica-tion [8]. The present work transfers that target-reset construction to a one-sided squared margin in token-level log-ratio space. The experiments show that this substitution can change reward-model scores and objective-specific dynamics under the evaluated conditions, but they do not support treating OR as a replacement for every stabilizing role played by clipping, a critic, reference regularization, or the advantage estimator. In particular, the smooth one-sided saturation of the scalar OR loss should not be interpreted as a policy-level trust region. 

5.2 Interpreting the Persistent Policy Displacement 

The group-relative displacement result is consistent with the scope of the Method section. Proposition 1 establishes that a token on the favorable saturated branch contributes zero direct OR residual during that evaluation. It does not constrain the optimizer step, bound the adverse branch, reverse displacement accumulated in earlier updates, or guarantee proximity to either πθold or πref . The active-branch derivative can grow without bound when the sampled log-ratio moves far in the adverse direction, and the realized minibatch update combines contributions from many tokens together with entropy and reference-policy terms. Four optimization epochs are also performed for each rollout batch before a new rollout-policy snapshot is formed. Consequently, sample-level saturation and small OR residuals can coexist with large aggregate movement from the rollout policy. Changing batches and advantage signs add another distinction between the scalar analysis and the complete training process. The favorable branch for a sampled token is defined using the current estimated advantage sign, while later 16 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 rollouts may contain different tokens, states, and signs. A token that is inactive in one evaluation therefore does not remain permanently constrained in subsequent updates. This observation explains why the Method does not predict a cumulative drift bound, but it does not by itself explain why the group-relative runs reach displacement values an order of magnitude larger than the GAE runs. Within the group-relative family, GRPO and GRPO-OR share the same group size, response cap, sampling procedure, optimization epochs, and reference-policy treatment. The matched comparison therefore supports one limited con-clusion: replacing the clipped surrogate with the present OR loss is insufficient to remove the observed displacement under this configuration. The mechanisms responsible for the larger group-relative displacement, and the factors that might change it, are left to Sec. 6 rather than inferred from the current runs. 

5.3 Limitations and Scope 

The statistical evidence is limited to three seeds per method. The reported means and standard deviations describe the observed runs but do not support significance testing, reliable ranking of variance, or claims that the same ordering would persist under additional seeds. This qualification applies both to the larger observed spread of PPO-OR and to the smaller observed spread of GRPO-OR. The terminal policy-loss and drift entries in Table 3 are approximate ranges read from multi-seed mean curves rather than statistics computed from exported per-seed terminal values. They support the reported order-of-magnitude contrast, but not fine-grained numerical comparison. Evaluation relies on training-time scores from one frozen reward model, not on independent human judgments or a fixed held-out preference benchmark. The Bradley–Terry objective identifies score differences but does not calibrate an absolute zero, and the reward model’s reported 60–61% pairwise accuracy indicates a noisy preference signal. Sharing this scorer across methods removes reward-model variation between runs, but it does not establish that higher proxy scores correspond to better human-preferred behavior or that scorer errors affect every policy distribution equally. More generally, optimizing an imperfect reward model can separate proxy reward from the intended preference objec-tive [29]. External validity is further limited by the use of one instruction-tuned 1B model and one dataset. The study does not include a task-specific SFT stage, and hh-rlhf supplies both reward-model pairs and policy-optimization prompts; possible prompt overlap and reuse of the same source may favor the training distribution. The findings therefore characterize this constrained post-training setup rather than a general ranking of PPO, GRPO, and OR-based methods. The matched comparisons use shared rather than independently tuned hyperparameters. In the GAE family, the com-mon nominal setting ϵ = αOR = 0 .2 does not imply identical saturation boundaries: PPO clipping corresponds to the asymmetric log-ratio interval [log(0 .8) , log(1 .2)] ≈ [−0.223 , +0 .182] , whereas PPO-OR uses symmetric mar-gins at [−0.2, +0 .2] . No sensitivity analysis was performed for the OR margin, value-head warmup, value clipping, method-specific learning rates, or optimization epochs. PPO-clip’s lower observed score in this experiment should therefore not be interpreted as a general inability to learn. The group-relative results are likewise restricted by the hardware-constrained choice G = 2 , for which the standard-deviation convention is especially consequential. Larger groups may alter reward diversity, advantage magnitudes, and update dynamics, but the present runs do not show whether they would reduce policy displacement. Cross-family comparisons are additionally confounded by critic usage, reference-regularization placement, response length, sampling procedure, and CPU offloading; the strongest evidence remains the two within-family policy-loss substitutions. Finally, runtime measurements come from one representative run per method and reflect the particular implementa-tion, including model placement, reward-model transfers, masking, and logging. They do not establish an intrinsic computational advantage of the scalar OR objective. The larger-group memory values are engineering projections rather than measured end-to-end runs. The questions left unresolved by these limitations and the experiments needed to address them are presented separately in Secs. 6 and 7. 

# 6 Open Questions Raised by the Study 

The experiments leave three questions unresolved. 

What drives the large rollout-to-current policy displacement in the group-relative runs? GRPO and GRPO-OR both move much farther from the rollout policy than the GAE-based methods, even though the GRPO-OR residual ap-proaches zero and its overshoot fraction declines during training. The present study cannot isolate the effects of the small response group ( G = 2 ), critic removal, the shorter response cap, repeated optimization epochs, or the placement of reference-policy regularization. 17 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

Do the OR diagnostics have predictive value? The overshoot fraction measures how often tokens lie beyond the favorable margin, while the logged “OR energy” measures squared target magnitude. A declining overshoot fraction and a near-zero OR residual describe the state of the OR objective, but neither establishes policy convergence. It remains unknown whether either diagnostic predicts subsequent reward change, policy displacement, or optimization failure. 

Why do the observed effects of OR differ between the two matched comparisons? Under GAE, PPO-OR produces a higher observed mean reward-model score but a larger observed seed spread. Under group-relative advantages, GRPO-OR produces a smaller observed seed spread and a near-zero terminal residual without a higher observed mean score. The current evidence cannot determine whether this contrast is driven by advantage construction, interaction with the OR margin, reward-model noise, or other family-specific differences in the training pipelines. 

# 7 Future Directions 

The highest-priority experiment is a controlled group-size study with G ∈ { 2, 4, 8} while holding the model, prompt distribution, response length, sampled-token budget, update epochs, and reference-policy coefficient fixed. The study should report uncapped rollout-to-current displacement, displacement from the frozen reference policy, reward-model score, and OR branch occupancy. If larger groups do not reduce displacement, stronger adaptive reference regulariza-tion or an explicit two-sided displacement penalty should be compared against standard KL-based controls. The GAE comparison should be repeated with more seeds and with both shared and method-specific hyperparameter tuning. The most relevant factors are value-head warmup, the OR margin, and the mismatch between PPO’s asymmetric log-ratio clipping boundaries and the symmetric OR margins used here. An asymmetric OR variant would test whether the current margin choice contributes to the observed mean–dispersion trade-off. A second extension is to retain advantage-magnitude information on active tokens while preserving the OR zero-residual branch: 

Lw 

> OR

= 1

NM

X

> (b,t )∈M

ˆAb,t (ρb,t − sg[ τb,t ]) 2 .

This objective is proposed rather than evaluated here. Raw, normalized, and clipped magnitude weights should be compared to determine whether restoring magnitude information improves reward or displacement, or instead rein-troduces sensitivity to noisy advantage estimates. Finally, external validity requires disjoint reward-model and RL prompt sets, checkpoint selection on held-out validation data, and final evaluation on separate prompts using indepen-dent preference judgments. The matched PPO-clip versus PPO-OR and GRPO versus GRPO-OR comparisons should then be repeated with a stronger reward model, a task-specific SFT checkpoint, and larger policies. A staged study at approximately 1B, 3B, and 7B–8B scale is more defensible than extrapolating directly from the present 1B experiment to very large models. 

# 8 Conclusion 

We introduced PPO-OR and GRPO-OR, which replace the PPO-style clipped policy term with a continuously differ-entiable, one-sided squared margin in rollout-relative token log-ratio space while retaining the advantage estimator and remaining optimization components of their parent pipelines. The observed effect depends on the advantage fam-ily. In the matched GAE comparison, PPO-OR achieves a higher mean final training-time reward-model score than PPO-clip by 0.305 score units, although its observed across-seed spread is also larger. In the matched group-relative comparison, GRPO-OR does not achieve a higher mean score, but it shows a smaller observed seed spread, a near-zero terminal OR residual, and a declining overshoot fraction. These objective-specific diagnostics should not be interpreted as directly comparable loss magnitudes or as evidence of policy convergence.The principal qualification is that local OR saturation does not by itself control aggregate policy movement. Both group-relative methods retain substantially larger rollout-to-current log-ratio displacement than the GAE-based methods, and replacing the clipped GRPO objective with OR does not remove that displacement. The supported conclusion is therefore narrower than a general claim of superiority: OR changes the sample-level saturation geometry and can alter reward-score and op-timization behavior, but it is not a trust-region mechanism and does not replace the roles of advantage estimation, critic learning, or reference-policy regularization. Whether the observed family-dependent effects persist under larger response groups, stronger reward models, held-out preference evaluation, and method-specific tuning remains open. 18 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

# References 

[1] Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. [2] Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F. Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , volume 33, 2020. [3] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, 2022. [4] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 , 2022. [5] John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Philipp Moritz, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. Trust region policy opti-mization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1889–1897. PMLR, 2015. [6] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [7] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. [8] Kanishka Tyagi, Chinmay Rane, Ketaki Vaidya, Jeshwanth Challgundla, Soumitro Swapan Auddy, and Michael Manry. Making sigmoid-MSE great again: Output reset challenges softmax cross-entropy in neural network classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11213 , 2024. [9] Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. 

Machine Learning , 8:229–256, 1992. [10] Richard S. Sutton, David A. McAllester, Satinder P. Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 12, pages 1057–1063, 1999. [11] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional con-tinuous control using generalized advantage estimation. International Conference on Learning Representations ,2016. [12] Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry Rudolph, and Alek-sander Madry. Implementation matters in deep rl: A case study on ppo and trpo. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [13] Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry Rudolph, and Alek-sander Madry. A closer look at deep policy gradients. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2020. [14] Yuhui Wang, Hao He, and Xiaoyang Tan. Truly proximal policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 35th Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence Conference , volume 115 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 113–122. PMLR, 2020. [15] Saurabh Garg, Joshua Zhanson, Emilio Parisotto, Adarsh Prasad, J. Zico Kolter, Zachary Chase Lipton, Sivara-man Balakrishnan, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Pradeep Ravikumar. On proximal policy optimization’s heavy-tailed gradients. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3610–3619. PMLR, 2021. [16] Ruinan Jin, Shuai Li, and Baoxiang Wang. On stationary point convergence of ppo-clip. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [17] Zhengpeng Xie, Qiang Zhang, Fan Yang, Marco Hutter, and Renjing Xu. Simple policy optimization. In Pro-ceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 68813–68824. PMLR, 2025. [18] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Di-rect preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. 19 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 [19] Ziniu Li, Tian Xu, Yushun Zhang, Zhihang Lin, Yang Yu, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Remax: A simple, effective, and efficient reinforcement learning method for aligning large language models, 2024. [20] Arash Ahmadian, Chris Cremer, Matthias Gallé, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, Olivier Pietquin, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Back to basics: Revisiting REINFORCE-style optimization for learning from human feedback in LLMs. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 12248–12267, 2024. [21] DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, et al. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. [22] Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, et al. DAPO: An open-source LLM reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476 , 2025. [23] Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee, and Min Lin. Under-standing r1-zero-like training: A critical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20783 , 2025. [24] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient finetuning of quan-tized LLMs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. [25] Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Younes Belkada, and Sayak Paul. PEFT: State-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. Hugging Face software library, 2022. [26] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2022. [27] Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324–345, 1952. [28] Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [29] Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023. 

# A Experimental Scope Relative to a Larger-Scale RLHF Pipeline 

Table 5 places the present implementation in the context of a more fully separated, larger-scale RLHF evaluation pipeline. The comparison clarifies the scope of the evidence rather than defining a single “ideal” implementation. Table 5: Comparison between common larger-scale RLHF practice and the controlled implementation used in this study.        

> Stage Common larger-scale practice Current study Implication
> Supervised fine-tuning Task-specific SFT checkpoint trained on a substantial instruction set.
> Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct used directly, without an additional study-specific SFT stage. The study does not test whether task-specific SFT changes the relative behavior of the policy objectives. Preference-data separation Disjoint reward-model train/validation/test splits, with separate RL and final-evaluation prompts. Reward model trained on 8,000
> hh-rlhf pairs; RL prompts drawn from the same source dataset. Prompt-level overlap is not documented. Possible overlap may inflate training-time reward-model scores and limits generalization claims; shared conditions do not guarantee that bias cancels across methods. RL prompt coverage Large, diverse RL prompt set with an independent held-out evaluation set. Human turns from hh-rlhf used for 500 optimization steps; no independent held-out human-preference evaluation. The results characterize this training setup and prompt distribution, not broad post-training performance.
> Continued on next page

20 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

Table 5 continued 

Stage Common larger-scale practice Current study Implication 

Policy adaptation Full-model tuning or a parameter-efficient configuration selected for the target model and compute budget. LoRA with rank r = 16 and approximately four million trainable policy parameters. The restricted trainable subspace enables single-GPU experiments but may change the dynamics relative to full-model or higher-rank tuning. Reward model Reward model selected on held-out preference data and evaluated before policy optimization. MLP scalar head on a frozen 4-bit Llama backbone; recorded pairwise accuracy approximately 60–61%. Scores may be noisy and are not calibrated measures of human utility; checkpoint selection and evaluation split must match the finalized record. Group-relative configuration Group size and response length evaluated through controlled ablations. Group size G = 2 , 64-token response cap, and reward-model CPU offload during generation and policy updates. The small group and shorter response cap constrain the group-relative findings and confound direct cross-family comparisons. Final evaluation Fixed checkpoints evaluated on held-out prompts using independent preference judgments and, where appropriate, multiple evaluators. Final logged training-time score from the same frozen reward model, reported over three seeds. The evidence supports matched within-family comparisons, not calibrated utility, statistical significance, or held-out human-preference claims. 

# B Illustrative Preference-Pair Format 

The following example illustrates the chosen–rejected response format used to train the Bradley–Terry reward model. It is included only to clarify the data structure and is not used as evidence about reward-model quality. 

chosen: Human: I want to learn how to cook. Can you give me some basic tips? Assistant: Sure! Start with simple recipes. Master knife skills early. Control your heat. Taste as you go and season at each stage. rejected: Human: I want to learn how to cook. Can you give me some basic tips? Assistant: Cooking is a great skill. Try different recipes and see what you like. Practice makes perfect so just keep trying. 

# C Reference Implementation 

The listing below makes three implementation choices explicit. First, zero-advantage tokens follow the detached current log-ratio and therefore contribute zero direct OR residual. Second, the diagnostic returned by output_reset 

is the squared target magnitude, not the squared prediction residual. Third, group-relative advantages use a standard deviation lower-clamped at 10 −4, and zero-variance groups are excluded before policy-loss aggregation. The standard-deviation correction is written explicitly so that the implementation does not depend on a library default. 

def output_reset(log_ratio, advantages, alpha=0.2): """ Construct detached OR targets. advantage > 0: target +alpha until favorable overshoot advantage < 0: target -alpha until favorable overshoot advantage = 0: target current log-ratio, giving zero residual """ 

21 A PREPRINT - J ULY 21, 2026 

y = log_ratio.detach() positive = advantages > 0 negative = advantages < 0 target = y.clone() target = torch.where( positive, torch.full_like(y, +alpha), target )target = torch.where( negative, torch.full_like(y, -alpha), target )# Favorable overshoot follows the detached current output. target = torch.where(positive & (y > +alpha), y, target) target = torch.where(negative & (y < -alpha), y, target) # Diagnostic only: squared target magnitude, not OR residual. target_magnitude_sq = target.square().mean(dim=0) return target, target_magnitude_sq def group_relative_advantages(rm_grouped, eps=1e-4): """ rm_grouped has shape [num_prompts, group_size]. Zero-variance groups are excluded from returned advantages. """ group_mean = rm_grouped.mean(dim=1, keepdim=True) # Explicit Bessel correction; equivalent to unbiased=True. raw_group_std = rm_grouped.std( dim=1, keepdim=True, correction=1 )valid_group = raw_group_std.squeeze(1) > 0 denom = raw_group_std.clamp(min=eps) advantages = (rm_grouped - group_mean) / denom return advantages[valid_group], valid_group 

22