Title: Envs-FORGE: Frontier-Optimized Reward-Grounded Environment Synthesis for Agent RL

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.14312v1

Published Time: Mon, 17 Aug 2026 01:00:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Envs-FORGE: Frontier-Optimized Reward-Grounded Environment Synthesis for Agent RL 

Xiaojun Wu ∗ 1,2, Cehao Yang ∗ 1,2, Honghao Liu ∗ 1,2, Xueyuan Lin ∗ 2

ZhiChao Shi 1,3, Hao Zhou 1,3, Xuhui Jiang 1,3, Chengjin Xu 1,3

Jia Li † 2, Jian Guo † 11IDEA Research 

> 2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 

> 3

DataArcTech Ltd. 

Abstract 

Reinforcement learning (RL) for terminal agents needs executable training environments with reliable rewards and useful difficulty. Fixed recipes such as few-shot, Self-Instruct, and Evol-Instruct apply the same prompting policy to every seed, even when the current pol-icy would benefit from a harder, easier, or sim-ply different task. We present Envs-FORGE, a prompting policy that converts verifier re-wards into per-seed environment-synthesis ac-tions. Envs-FORGE estimates seed pass rates, scores six projection–direction actions around a target learning frontier, and solves a per-seed mixed-integer linear program (MILP) to choose the action that conditions generation. The se-lected action drives synchronized rewriting of the instruction, fixtures, oracle solution, tests, and Docker environment; only gold-verified bundles enter RL training. The indexed MILP form also supports optional soft skill cover-age for portfolio planning. On Qwen 3.5 35B, Envs-FORGE improves Pass@1 over Base by 9.2 percentage points on tb-core (40.0% to 49.2%) and 6.4 points on tb-2.0 (23.0% to 29.4%), exceeding the strongest fixed-recipe baseline by 2.4 and 2.1 points. It reaches 77.1% on SWE-bench Verified versus 73.4% for Base, and improves tb-core by 6.8–9.2 points across the evaluated 4B–35B models. All synthesis methods export 100 verified en-vironments and use 2.27M–2.88M synthesis tokens, placing the comparison at the same downstream training-set size and the same operational scale. The source code is avail-able at https://github.com/DataArcTech/ DataArc-SynData-Toolkit/ .

1 Introduction 

Terminal agents are becoming practical interfaces for software engineering, system administration, 

> *Equal Contribution
> †Corresponding Author

and command-line data work. SWE-agent and OpenHands provide interactive execution loops, and Terminal-Bench and SWE-bench Verified eval-uate containerized terminal tasks and repository repair (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Merrill et al., 2026; OpenAI, 2024). RL training for these agents needs more than prompts or transcripts: it needs executable environments whose tests provide reliable rewards and whose difficulty matches the current policy. We study the prompting policy for environment synthesis. Few-shot, Self-Instruct, Evol-Instruct, and agentic prompting flows define how an LLM generates or rewrites tasks (Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2025; Mitra et al., 2024). Terminal-synthesis systems add useful auxiliary components, including healthy-runtime inversion, skill-graph sampling, error injection, repository construction, procedural generation, and capability-gap discov-ery (Lin et al., 2026; Fan et al., 2026; Zhu et al., 2026; Wu et al., 2026; Gandhi et al., 2026; Dong et al., 2026). These components can be paired with many prompting policies. Our comparison isolates the policy choice itself: for a fixed synthesis and verification pipeline, which operation should the LLM apply to each seed? This paper asks a concrete selection question: given a seed task and a current policy, which syn-thesis action should place the resulting environ-ment near the learning frontier? Figure 1 shows the contrast. Envs-FORGE first estimates the seed pass rate from verifier rewards. It then scores six actions formed by a projection (increase, reduce, or diversify) and an evolution direction (in-depth or in-breadth). A per-seed MILP selects the ac-tion under feasibility constraints, and the chosen action conditions joint rewriting of the instruction, fixtures, oracle solution, tests, and Docker envi-ronment. The output is accepted only after gold verification. 1arXiv:2608.14312v1 [cs.CL] 14 Aug 2026 A task’s value for RL depends on its difficulty relative to the policy, not only on fluent wording. DART-Math allocates more response trials to dif-ficult queries, and targeted tabular synthesis steers generators toward hard observations (Tong et al., 2024; Ferracci et al., 2024). Envs-FORGE applies the same frontier idea to executable environment construction: the decision variable is the transfor-mation applied to a seed. Fixed recipes become restricted masks in the same action space. Few-shot preserves seed structure, Self-Instruct invents a related task, and Evol-Instruct fixes the direction of evolution. Envs-FORGE can choose both projec-tion and direction, including a reduce-complexity projection that creates bridge tasks from seeds be-yond the current policy. On Qwen 3.5 35B trained with Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), Envs-FORGE im-proves Pass@1 over Base from 40.0% to 49.2% on tb-core and from 23.0% to 29.4% on tb-2.0. It exceeds the strongest fixed-recipe baseline on each benchmark by 2.4 and 2.1 percentage points, re-spectively. All four synthesis methods operate at a broadly comparable scale: total token use ranges from 2.27M to 2.88M while each exports exactly 100 verified environments. We report this resource accounting alongside downstream performance. Our main contributions are: • We recast agent environment synthesis as reward-grounded action selection over veri-fied seed tasks, with explicit increase, reduce, and diversify projections and in-depth/in-breadth evolution directions. • We formulate per-task projection–direction se-lection as a mixed-integer program, represent the approximate semantics of fixed synthesis recipes as restricted action masks, and pro-vide an indexed extension for optional soft skill coverage alongside synchronized artifact rewriting and gold verification. • We evaluate against few-shot, Self-Instruct, and Evol-Instruct on tb-core, tb-2.0, and SWE-bench Verified, analyze tb-core across Qwen 3.5 model sizes, and report synthesis-resource accounting and qualitative environ-ment traces. 

2 Related Work 

Terminal agents and benchmarks. Terminal interaction is a central setting for agentic mod-els. SWE-agent and OpenHands instantiate tool-using execution loops, and Terminal-Bench and SWE-bench Verified evaluate containerized termi-nal tasks and repository repair (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Merrill et al., 2026; OpenAI, 2024). These benchmarks provide executable eval-uation targets, not a policy-conditioned rule for synthesizing new training environments. 

Synthetic instruction and environment genera-tion. Self-Instruct, WizardLM, and AgentInstruct expand instruction data through self-generated ex-amples, complexity evolution, or agentic flows (Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2025; Mitra et al., 2024). Terminal-specific systems add components that change the synthesis substrate: CLI-Gym re-verts healthy Docker runtimes to failure states; SkillSynth samples skill-graph paths; TermiGen constructs containers and injects trajectory errors; TerminalTraj builds Dockerized tasks from repos-itories; Endless Terminals procedurally generates verified tasks; and Agent-World discovers tasks from tool ecosystems and capability gaps (Lin et al., 2026; Fan et al., 2026; Zhu et al., 2026; Wu et al., 2026; Gandhi et al., 2026; Dong et al., 2026). These additions are compatible with our line of work as auxiliary runtime, perturbation, construc-tion, or discovery components. Envs-FORGE ad-dresses a different layer: the prompting policy that chooses how an LLM should transform each seed. We compare against few-shot, Self-Instruct, and Evol-Instruct as same-level fixed policies under a shared environment-generation and verification pipeline. 

Difficulty-aware selection. Our formulation is related to difficulty-aware data selection and hardness-aware synthesis. DART-Math assigns more response-generation trials to difficult queries, and targeted tabular synthesis trains generators on observations identified as hard (Tong et al., 2024; Ferracci et al., 2024). Their decision concerns where to spend synthesis effort. Our decision con-cerns which transformation to apply to an exe-cutable seed. Envs-FORGE estimates the effect of each projection with a fixed transfer prior and selects the action closest to the learning frontier. Executable verification then checks whether the materialized bundle is runnable, gradeable, and in-ternally consistent. 2Why fixed synthesis misses the learning frontier 

Fixed recipe Frontier-aware recipe        

> Seed Environment Current Agent Seed Environment Current Agent
> ONE FIXED PROJECTION
> same rewrite prompt for every seed
> Seed: parse server logs
> agent pass rate = 0.95
> Rewrite action:
> add JSON output
> STILL TOO EASY
> weak training signal
> rollout rewrite off frontier
> PROBE + CHOOSE increase | reduce | diversify
> Same seed: parse server logs
> agent pass rate = 0.95 PROBE
> this seed is too easy INCREASE
> complexity Rewrite: aggregate rotated logs
> and handle malformed rows
> Gold verifier
> tests pass
> reward = 1 ON THE LEARNING FRONTIER
> rollout score probe rewrite
> (a) Same action, regardless of capability (b) Probe, project, and verify

Figure 1: Motivation contrast. Fixed prompt recipes apply the same rewrite strategy to every seed, while Envs-FORGE estimates the seed’s pass rate first and then chooses among increase, reduce, and diversify projections to land near the learning frontier. 

3 Method 

3.1 Problem Setting and Overview 

We study environment synthesis for terminal agents trained with reinforcement learning. A seed task is represented as si = ( Ii, D i, S i, T i, E i), where Ii is the instruction, Di is the fixture and data bundle, 

Si is an oracle solution, Ti is the test suite, and Ei

is the executable environment. These components are coupled: changing the instruction without up-dating the solution or tests can produce a task that is either ungradeable or inconsistent with its stated objective. Our method separates two decisions that fixed synthesis recipes merge into one prompt. First, it decides how a seed should move relative to the current agent. Second, it rewrites and verifies the complete environment under that decision. The projection set is 

A = {increase , reduce , diversify },

and the evolution-direction set is 

D = {in_depth , in_breadth }.

Each candidate action is ci,a,d = ( si, a, d ), with 

a ∈ A and d ∈ D . Figure 2 summarizes the pipeline. Envs-FORGE estimates a frontier score for each candidate, solves one per-seed action-selection problem, conditions the synthesis prompt on the selected action, and accepts only environ-ments that pass static checks and gold verification. The reported Envs-FORGE run uses the MILP se-lector described below. 

3.2 Frontier-Aware Candidate Scoring 

The selector uses verifier rewards from the current policy. For seed i, let ri,t ∈ [0 , 1] be the verifier reward from rollout t. We estimate the seed pass rate as 

ˆpi = 1

niniX

t=1 

ri,t ,

where binary rewards yield the empirical success rate and partial rewards, when available, contribute proportionally. The estimate is computed before candidate construction and remains fixed during optimization. We approximate the post-projection pass rate of candidate ci,a,d as 

˜pi,a,d = clip(ˆ pi + ∆ aγd, 0, 1) , (1) where ∆increase = −0.25 , ∆reduce = 0.25 ,and ∆diversify = 0 encode the intended diffi-culty movement. The factors γin_depth = 1 and 

γin_breadth = 0.65 attenuate breadth changes. These fixed transfer priors rank candidates before generation; they are not empirical claims that ev-ery materialized task shifts pass rate by the same amount. 3Seed Environment Current RL Agent RL Update     

> FRONTIER REASONING TRUSTED TOOL SUITE
> Pass-rate Probe
> roll out current agent
> estimate p̂ i
> Working State
> pass rate / skill graph artifact edit mask
> Joint Selector (MILP)
> increase / reduce / diversify in-depth / in-breadth
> ACTION selected projection × direction
> e.g., increase × in-depth Joint Rewriter
> instruction + fixtures solution + tests + Docker
> Candidate Env
> synchronized bundle
> Static Checks
> schema / path Docker / overlap
> Gold Verifier
> oracle tests
> r in {0,1}
> OBSERVATION r = 0
> retry with another projection
> seed task rollouts state select condition prompt rewrite tool call r = 1 feedback training tasks policy update
> Verified Env Pool

Figure 2: Envs-FORGE pipeline. Seed tasks are scored by a frontier-aware pass-rate estimator, and the MILP jointly chooses a projection and evolution direction before the synthesis model rewrites the full environment bundle. Only tasks that pass static checks and gold verification enter GRPO training. 

We map the predicted pass rate to a learning-frontier score 

Fi,a,d = exp 



− (˜ pi,a,d − τ )2

2σ2



,τ = 0 .5, σ = 0 .2,

(2) so that candidates near the target frontier receive higher scores. The three projections have distinct roles. increase adds concrete constraints, edge cases, stricter outputs, or larger fixtures for easy seeds. reduce removes secondary systems or cre-ates a smaller bridge task for seeds beyond the current policy. diversify changes fixtures or neighboring requirements while preserving approx-imately the same difficulty and skill family. Each candidate carries a skill-node set and a consistency contract. Let Ri,a,d be required skill nodes and Oi,a,d be optional nodes that the candi-date may add or remove. Before solving, the meta-data records prompt eligibility, length, split mem-bership, and known overlap indicators. Schema, Docker, and executable-test checks are applied af-ter materialization. This division lets the selec-tor reason over frontier value, skill coverage, and feasibility signals while leaving semantic artifact consistency to executable verification. 

3.3 Per-Task MILP Action Selection 

The optimization unit is one seed task and its six candidate actions. For a given seed, the MILP se-lects one projection and one evolution direction; linked skill variables expose the subgraph induced by that action. We write the equations in indexed form over seeds so independent per-task instances can be stacked for implementation and an optional portfolio mode can add shared skill-coverage tar-gets. We introduce binary variables 

xi,a,d ∈ { 0, 1}, ui,a,d,v ∈ { 0, 1},

where xi,a,d = 1 selects action (a, d ) for seed i,and ui,a,d,v = 1 activates skill node v for that can-didate. For active skill-coverage targets mv, we in-troduce continuous slack 0 ≤ ξv ≤ ¯ξ; the reported experiments use ¯ξ = 0 .2. Because the frontier scores and candidate metadata are precomputed be-fore solving, the following objective is linear in the decision variables: 

max 

x,u,ξ 

X

i,a,d 

xi,a,d Fi,a,d − ε X

i,a,d 

X

v∈Oi,a,d 

ui,a,d,v 

− λ X

v

ξv,

(3) where ε = 10 −6 removes arbitrary activation of optional nodes and λ = 0 .25 penalizes unmet cov-erage when coverage targets are active. The ob-jective prioritizes frontier value, prefers compact skill realizations, and records bounded coverage shortfalls through ξv.The core constraints enforce local action car-dinality and action–skill consistency. Here, N is the number of selected seed–action instances in the indexed form. A per-task instance selects one action; the reported stacked export has N = |S| .4The quantities mv and ξv are instantiated for active skill-coverage targets, with the slack cap ¯ξ = 0 .2

in the reported experiments. Candidates that fail eligibility checks, configured overlap filters, or the prompt-length budget are removed from the fea-sible set; equivalently, they can be represented by 

xi,a,d ≤ vi,a,d , xi,a,d ≤ 1−ℓi,a,d , and pi,a,d xi,a,d ≤

Pmax , where vi,a,d , ℓi,a,d , and pi,a,d denote eligibil-ity, known overlap risk, and prompt length. Full artifact validity is checked after generation. The resulting linear constraints are 

X

> a,d

xi,a,d ≤ 1 ∀i, (4) 

X

> i,a,d

xi,a,d = N, (5) 

ui,a,d,v = xi,a,d ∀v ∈ Ri,a,d , (6) 

ui,a,d,v ≤ xi,a,d ∀v ∈ Oi,a,d , (7) 

ui,a,d,v = 0 ∀v / ∈ Ri,a,d ∪ Oi,a,d ,

(8) 

X

> i,a,d

ui,a,d,v + ξv ≥ mv ∀v, (9) 

0 ≤ ξv ≤ ¯ξ ∀v. (10) The formulation also makes the relationship to heuristic baselines explicit. Let ρb,a,d ∈ { 0, 1} be a mask for baseline b. Adding 

xi,a,d ≤ ρb,a,d ∀i, a, d (11) restricts the optimizer to a baseline-specific semantic view. Few-shot is approximated by (diversify , in_depth ) because it preserves seed structure while changing concrete re-quirements; self-instruct is approximated by 

(diversify , in_breadth ) because it invents a re-lated task in the same domain; evol-depth fixes 

d = in_depth ; and evol-breadth fixes d =

in_breadth . These masks place fixed prompting policies in a shared action space. Envs-FORGE chooses both factors and adds the reduce projec-tion for bridge-task construction. 

Implementation boundary. The reported exper-iment instantiates the selector in its intended per-seed mode. Each of the 100 seeds solves a six-action MILP and selects one action; the trace se-rializes these decisions in the indexed form with 

N = 100 = |S| and active coverage slack capped at ¯ξ = 0 .2. Shared coverage targets and smaller portfolio sizes remain optional modes for curricula with explicit skill quotas, and Appendix B reports the solver trace. The main evaluation measures the complete per-seed selector, synchronized materi-alization, and verification pipeline under the same 100-environment export size as the fixed-policy baselines. 

3.4 Verified Environment Synthesis 

After selection, a synthesis model receives the pro-jection, evolution direction, preserved skill sub-graph, and artifact-consistency contract. It rewrites the instruction, fixture bundle, oracle solution, tests, and Docker environment jointly. The prompt for-bids instruction-only edits and hidden test require-ments, and it requires the verifier output to be mate-rialized in the expected reward file. The high-level action becomes a complete Terminal-Bench-style task. We then apply schema, path-safety, length, Docker, test, and overlap checks. An environment enters the training pool only if its oracle solution obtains reward 1 under the generated tests. Gold verification is part of the data definition: gener-ation can explore many candidates, but training uses only synchronized, runnable, and gradeable environments. Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete selection, joint materialization, and verification procedure. 

Implementation note. The reported run applies one local MILP formulation per seed; for audit, the 100 local decisions are serialized in the indexed model in Eqs. 3–10. Active coverage slack is capped at 

¯ξ = 0 .2. A portfolio deployment may instead use smaller export targets or tighter coverage slack. 

3.5 GRPO Training and Evaluation 

Accepted environments are converted to a common Terminal-Bench task format and used for GRPO training (Shao et al., 2024). The main comparison trains Qwen 3.5 35B (Yang et al., 2025); the model-size analysis additionally evaluates 4B, 9B, and 27B settings on tb-core. vLLM generates rollouts, and task tests provide rewards without a separate learned reward model. The training and evalua-tion protocols are fixed across synthesis sources within each comparison. Synthesis-resource use is reported separately and remains within the same overall scale across methods. 5Algorithm 1 Frontier-aware environment synthesis 

Require: Seed tasks S and current policy π

Ensure: Verified environment batch B 

> 1:

B ← ∅ 

> 2:

for each seed si ∈ S do  

> 3:

Estimate ˆpi from policy rollouts  

> 4:

for each (a, d ) ∈ A × D do  

> 5:

Derive Ri,a,d , Oi,a,d , and the artifact contract  

> 6:

Compute ˜pi,a,d and Fi,a,d  

> 7:

Remove candidates that fail pre-solve eligibility checks  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Solve the six-action per-task MILP for seed 

si and select (ai, d i) 

> 10:

Jointly materialize environment bundle 

˜si,a i,d i 

> 11:

Check its schema, paths, prompt length, overlap, and container isolation  

> 12:

Build ˜si,a i,d i ; run its oracle solution and generated tests  

> 13:

if the verifier returns reward 1 then  

> 14:

B ← B ∪ { ˜si,a i,d i } 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

return B

4 Experiments 

4.1 Setup 

We organize the evaluation around two questions: (1) does frontier-aware environment synthesis im-prove downstream agent performance over fixed prompting recipes, and (2) what synthesis work is needed to reach the shared 100-environment export size? 

Training sources and verification. We compare four synthetic training sources: few-shot prompt-ing, Self-Instruct, Evol-Instruct with both in-depth and in-breadth evolution, and Envs-FORGE with MILP selection. Each run continues generation, re-pair, and verification until exactly 100 environment bundles are accepted and exported as the down-stream RL training source. All synthesized condi-tions contribute the same number of verified train-ing tasks. Source records, materialized task direc-tories, attempts, and tokens measure the synthesis-stage work required to reach that endpoint. The Base row uses no synthesized training data. 

Training and evaluation. The main comparison uses Qwen 3.5 35B (Yang et al., 2025) trained with GRPO (Shao et al., 2024); the model ablation addi-tionally evaluates 4B, 9B, 27B, and 35B settings. Rollouts use vLLM and test-based rewards with-out a separate learned reward model. We evaluate Pass@1 on tb-core and tb-2.0 with a common pro-tocol, add SWE-bench Verified (OpenAI, 2024) in the benchmark ablation, and use tb-core for the model-size analysis. We report benchmark scores and percentage-point differences under this shared evaluation protocol. 

Baselines and resource accounting. Few-shot and Self-Instruct instantiate fixed prompting recipes; Evol-Instruct combines its in-depth and in-breadth variants. These controls isolate prompt-ing policy while holding artifact generation and verification fixed. The auxiliary components in Section 2 can be paired with any policy, so we keep them outside this controlled comparison. Envs-FORGE uses the MILP selector in Section 3.3. We report records, accepted outputs, task directories, attempts, and token totals. The methods material-ize 194–210 task directories and use 2.27M–2.88M tokens to export 100 verified environments each; rejected records and intermediate artifacts do not enter RL training. 

4.2 Main Results Envs-FORGE obtains the highest Pass@1 on both benchmarks. Table 1 shows that the Base model obtains 40.0% on tb-core and 23.0% on tb-2.0. Few-shot improves these scores to 43.2% and 24.1%, Self-Instruct to 45.6% and 27.3%, and Evol-Instruct to 46.8% and 25.6%. Envs-FORGE reaches 49.2% on tb-core and 29.4% on tb-2.0, giv-ing gains of 9.2 and 6.4 percentage points over Base. Against the strongest fixed-recipe baseline for each benchmark, the margins are 2.4 points over Evol-Instruct on tb-core and 2.1 points over Self-Instruct on tb-2.0. Figure 3(a) visualizes these scores. 

Interpretation. Across these runs, frontier-aware selection with verified environment synthe-sis yields the highest Pass@1 on both benchmarks. The fixed policies help over Base, but their single rewrite direction leaves some seeds too easy, too hard, or too close to the original task. Envs-FORGE instead chooses the seed-level action before gener-ation. 6Table 1: Training-data synthesis statistics and downstream Pass@1. Each synthesis run exports exactly 100 gold-verified environment bundles (the Accepted column) to downstream RL, with task directories and token use remaining in the same broad range across methods. Records, task directories, attempts, and token counts are synthesis-stage totals used to reach that fixed endpoint; they do not increase the downstream training-set cardinality. The Base row uses no synthesized training data. 

Training data / model Method Records Accepted Task dirs Attempt sum Prompt tokens Final completion tokens Total synthesis tokens tb-core Pass@1 tb-2.0 Pass@1 Base – – – – – – – – 40.0% 23.0% few-shot few_shot 121 100 210 226 1,835,473 607,592 2,443,065 43.2% 24.1% Self-Instruct self_instruct 113 100 194 190 1,745,028 527,247 2,272,275 45.6% 27.3% Evol-Instruct 

evol_instruct_in_depth +

evol_instruct_in_breadth 112 100 195 207 1,974,723 543,023 2,517,746 46.8% 25.6% 

Envs-FORGE MILP 120 100 203 291 1,862,146 618,910 2,881,056 49.2% 29.4% 40.0% 43.2% 45.6% 46.8% 49.2% 23.0% 24.1% 27.3% 25.6% 29.4% Base few-shot Self-Instruct Evol-Instruct Envs-FORGE 010 20 30 40 50        

> 1.84M 1.75M 1.97M 1.86M 0.61M 0.53M 0.54M 0.62M
> few-shot Self-Instruct Evol-Instruct Envs-FORGE 00.5 11.5 22.5 33.5 tb-core tb-2.0 Prompt tokens Final completion tokens
> Training data / model Synthesis method Pass@1 (%) Tokens (millions)
> (a) Downstream performance (b) Synthesis token budget 2.443M
> 226 attempts
> 2.272M
> 190 attempts
> 2.518M
> 207 attempts
> 2.881M
> 291 attempts

Figure 3: Downstream performance and synthesis cost. (a) Pass@1 on tb-core and tb-2.0; the Envs-FORGE run is highest on both benchmarks. (b) Synthesis-stage prompt and final-completion token totals for the four methods; labels above bars show total tokens and attempt counts. Totals occupy a comparable 2.27M–2.88M range, and each method exports exactly 100 gold-verified environments to RL. The bars measure the cost of reaching a fixed training-set size, not extra downstream training examples. 

4.3 Ablation Studies 

We next test whether the observed advantage is specific to the two Terminal-Bench-style scores or to the largest model setting. 

Benchmark coverage. The benchmark ablation adds SWE-bench Verified to tb-core and tb-2.0. As summarized in Table 2(a) and Figure 4(a), Envs-FORGE is the highest-scoring condition on all three benchmarks: 49.2% on tb-core, 29.4% on tb-2.0, and 77.1% on SWE-bench Verified. Rel-ative to Base, the gains are +9.2, +6.4, and +3.7 percentage points; relative to the strongest fixed-recipe baseline on each benchmark, the margins are +2.4, +2.1, and +1.3 points. 

Model coverage. The tb-core model ablation in Table 2(b) and Figure 4(b) reports gains across all four Qwen 3.5 sizes. Envs-FORGE improves over Base by 6.8 points at 4B, 7.2 at 9B, 8.1 at 27B, and 9.2 at 35B. 

4.4 Synthesis Cost Analysis Synthesis costs remain broadly comparable. 

Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows total synthesis use of 2.272M–2.881M tokens across the four meth-ods, and Table 1 shows 194–210 materialized task directories. Table 3 places tokens per accepted en-vironment in a 22,723–28,811 range and attempts per accepted environment in a 1.90–2.91 range. These aggregates are the same order of magnitude, and each method exports exactly 100 verified en-vironments to RL. The execution profiles differ inside this shared scale: Envs-FORGE uses 291 shorter attempts and has the lowest average tokens per attempt (9,901), while the fixed recipes use 190–226 attempts averaging 10,810–12,163 tokens. Attempts and intermediate directories characterize 7Figure 4: Benchmark and model ablations. (a) Pass@1 for the five training conditions across tb-core, tb-2.0, and SWE-bench Verified; labels show FORGE values and gains over Base. Marker shape redundantly encodes the training condition. (b) Base and FORGE tb-core Pass@1 across Qwen 3.5 model sizes; labels show the paired gain at each size. Table 2: Benchmark and model ablations. In (a), bold marks the best training condition for each benchmark. Panel (b) reports tb-core, where ∆ is FORGE minus Base in percentage points.                                    

> (a) Benchmark ablation
> Benchmark Base few-shot Self-Inst. Evol-Inst. FORGE tb-core 40.0% 43.2% 45.6% 46.8% 49.2%
> tb-2.0 23.0% 24.1% 27.3% 25.6% 29.4%
> SWE-bench Verified 73.4% 74.6% 75.2% 75.8% 77.1% (b) Model ablation
> Model Base FORGE ∆
> Qwen 3.5 4B 24.8% 31.6% +6.8 Qwen 3.5 9B 31.7% 38.9% +7.2 Qwen 3.5 27B 38.6% 46.7% +8.1 Qwen 3.5 35B 40.0% 49.2% +9.2

Table 3: Derived synthesis-cost statistics. Each synthe-sis run accepts 100 outputs, and all normalized costs remain within the same overall scale. Values are com-puted from the aggregate counts in Table 1.              

> Training data Attempts / accepted Tokens / accepted Tokens / attempt few-shot 2.26 24,431 10,810 Self-Instruct 1.90 22,723 11,959 Evol-Instruct 2.07 25,177 12,163 Envs-FORGE 2.91 28,811 9,901

the synthesis route to the fixed acceptance endpoint; they do not enlarge the downstream training set. 

4.5 Evaluation Scope 

The evaluation compares complete prompting poli-cies at a fixed 100-task export and a compara-ble synthesis scale. Expanded component stud-ies can isolate portfolio mode, solver-off selection, transfer-prior sensitivity, and Evol-Instruct’s depth and breadth variants. 

5 Conclusion 

We present Envs-FORGE, a frontier-aware prompt-ing policy for terminal-agent environment synthe-sis. The core idea is to choose a per-seed syn-thesis action from verifier-derived difficulty esti-mates, then use that action to condition synchro-nized and gold-verified environment rewriting. On Qwen 3.5 35B, Envs-FORGE obtains the highest Pass@1 among the evaluated methods on tb-core, tb-2.0, and SWE-bench Verified, improving over Base by 9.2, 6.4, and 3.7 percentage points. The results support a simple lesson: environment syn-thesis for agent RL should decide how each seed should move relative to the current policy before asking an LLM to rewrite it. 8Limitations 

This paper evaluates the per-seed MILP mode of Envs-FORGE, which is the setting used for the re-ported environment-synthesis run with active cov-erage slack capped at ¯ξ = 0 .2. The indexed formu-lation also supports portfolio-level skill quotas with different export targets or slack budgets, but those settings are outside the present comparison. The study compares complete prompting policies at a fixed 100-environment export size; finer compo-nent studies can test solver-off selection, transfer-prior sensitivity, and the depth and breadth variants of Evol-Instruct separately. Scaling the seed pool and model family is the natural next step. 

Ethical Considerations 

This work studies environment synthesis for ter-minal agents. The experiments use benchmark tasks and existing task and experiment records; no human-subject data are collected. More effective environment synthesis can reduce re-peated operational failures and improve the reli-ability of software-engineering agents, but it can also increase agent capability and persistence in command-line settings. Envs-FORGE records solver decisions and verification outcomes, applies overlap and artifact-consistency checks, and ad-mits an environment only after gold verification so that synthesis decisions remain inspectable. These safeguards do not remove risks inherited from the base model, execution system, tools, or benchmark data. Deployment should include task-appropriate permissions, sandboxing, logging, and human over-sight. 

Information About Use of AI Assistants 

In preparing this manuscript, the authors used AI-assisted tools, including large language models such as GPT-5 and DeepSeek-V4, for text refine-ment. Their use was limited to proofreading, gram-matical correction, and polishing linguistic expres-sions to improve clarity and readability. The au-thors are responsible for the final content, technical claims, citations, experimental results, and verifica-tion. 9References 

Guanting Dong, Junting Lu, Junjie Huang, Wanjun Zhong, Longxiang Liu, Shijue Huang, Zhenyu Li, Yang Zhao, Xiaoshuai Song, Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Yutao Zhu, Hanbin Wang, Fangyu Lei, Qinyu Luo, Mingyang Chen, Zehui Chen, Jiazhan Feng, Ji-Rong Wen, and Zhicheng Dou. 2026. Agent-world: Scaling real-world environment synthesis for evolving general agent intelligence. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.18292. Zhiyuan Fan, Tinghao Yu, Yuanjun Cai, Jiangtao Guan, Yun Yang, Dingxin Hu, Jiang Zhou, Xing Wu, Zhuo Han, Feng Zhang, and Lilin Wang. 2026. Toward scalable terminal task synthesis via skill graphs. 

Preprint , arXiv:2604.25727. Tommaso Ferracci, Leonie Tabea Goldmann, Anton Hinel, and Francesco Sanna Passino. 2024. Targeted synthetic data generation for tabular data via hardness characterization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00759 .Kanishk Gandhi, Shivam Garg, Noah D. Goodman, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. 2026. Endless terminals: Scaling rl environments for terminal agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.16443. Yusong Lin, Haiyang Wang, Shuzhe Wu, Lue Fan, Feiyang Pan, Sanyuan Zhao, and Dandan Tu. 2026. Cli-gym: Scalable cli task generation via agentic environment inversion. Preprint , arXiv:2602.10999. Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Car-lini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye, Haowei Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Je-nia Jitsev, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis Mastromichalakis, and 66 others. 2026. Terminal-bench: Benchmark-ing agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. Preprint , arXiv:2601.11868. Arindam Mitra, Luciano Del Corro, Guoqing Zheng, Shweti Mahajan, Dany Rouhana, Andres Codas, Yadong Lu, Wei ge Chen, Olga Vrousgos, Corby Rosset, Fillipe Silva, Hamed Khanpour, Yash Lara, and Ahmed Awadallah. 2024. Agentinstruct: Toward generative teaching with agentic flows. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.03502. OpenAI. 2024. Introducing SWE-bench verified. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-swe-bench-verified/ .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Yuxuan Tong, Xiwen Zhang, Rui Wang, Ruidong Wu, and Junxian He. 2024. Dart-math: Difficulty-aware rejection tuning for mathematical problem-solving. Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, and 5 others. 2025. Openhands: An open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents. Preprint , arXiv:2407.16741. Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. Preprint ,arXiv:2212.10560. Siwei Wu, Yizhi Li, Yuyang Song, Wei Zhang, Yang Wang, Riza Batista-Navarro, Xian Yang, Mingjie Tang, Bryan Dai, Jian Yang, and Chenghua Lin. 2026. Large-scale terminal agentic trajectory gen-eration from dockerized environments. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.01244. Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. 2025. Wizardlm: Empowering large pre-trained language models to follow complex instructions. Preprint , arXiv:2304.12244. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Preprint ,arXiv:2405.15793. Kaijie Zhu, Yuzhou Nie, Yijiang Li, Yiming Huang, Jialian Wu, Jiang Liu, Ximeng Sun, Zhenfei Yin, Lun Wang, Zicheng Liu, Emad Barsoum, William Yang Wang, and Wenbo Guo. 2026. Termigen: High-fidelity environment and robust trajectory synthesis for terminal agents. Preprint , arXiv:2602.07274. 

10 Appendix Overview 

The appendix is organized as follows. • Appendix A expands the optimization and re-producibility details, including action seman-tics, baseline restrictions, the solver–generation boundary, artifact-consistency checks, training and evaluation settings, and five qualitative fron-tier cases. • Appendix B describes MILP model assembly, SCIP’s branch-and-cut procedure, the recorded synthesis solve, solution decoding, fallback be-havior, and the boundary of the solver’s correct-ness guarantee. • Appendix C reproduces the core baseline and Envs-FORGE prompt clauses, including strat-egy injection, repair, the solver payload, projec-tion instructions, artifact edit masks, the skill-subgraph contract, and original-to-synthesized task excerpts. • Appendix D reports the compute resources used for synthesis, training, and evaluation. 

A Optimization and Reproducibility Details 

This appendix expands the action semantics, solver boundary, environment-verification protocol, and qualitative cases summarized in the main paper. 

A.1 Action Semantics and Baseline Restrictions 

The projection and evolution direction answer dif-ferent questions. The projection specifies how dif-ficulty should move relative to the current policy: increase an easy seed, reduce a hard seed into a bridge task, or diversify a seed already near the frontier. The direction specifies whether the rewrite follows the same skill chain ( in_depth ) or moves to a neighboring skill or task type ( in_breadth ). Table 4 records the operational contracts used to instantiate these choices. The restricted policies in the lower half of Ta-ble 4 make the baseline-inclusion claim precise. If 

XFORGE denotes the feasible set defined by Eqs. 4–9, then baseline b induces 

Xb = {x ∈ X FORGE : xi,a,d ≤ ρb,a,d ∀i, a, d } .

(12) This gives a unified optimization view of the prompting policies. The underlying prompts re-main distinct: few-shot is structurally narrower than generic diversification, Self-Instruct permits freer same-domain invention, and the two Evol-Instruct variants fix an evolution direction. Envs-FORGE selects both the projection and direction for each seed from the full feasible region using policy-relative frontier scores; optional portfolio mode adds shared skill-coverage targets across those local instances. 

A.2 Candidate Construction and Solver Boundary 

Each seed induces six candidate action variants and one local MILP instance. Before solving, the pipeline estimates the seed pass rate, applies the fixed projection–direction transfer heuristic in Eq. 1, computes the frontier utility in Eq. 2, and derives required and optional skill nodes. Candi-date prompt length, split membership, and known overlap or validity indicators are also treated as con-stants. The local MILP jointly selects the projec-tion and evolution direction; the indexed equations additionally expose skill activation and optional portfolio coverage. Table 5 lists the skill-node vo-cabulary, and Table 6 summarizes the complete notation. The artifact edit mask is outside the solver. It is deterministically derived from the selected action and passed to generation as a consistency contract. Joint materialization and executable verification en-force semantic dependencies among instructions, fixtures, solutions, tests, and containers; the MILP handles the discrete action choice. Likewise, ρb,a,d 

is an analysis-time constant for defining restricted policies. It is not a free variable in the default Envs-FORGE solve. Failed verification attempts are excluded from the training set; generation or re-pair can continue only within the synthesis budget for that run. Section B details model assembly, branch-and-cut solution, and solver-trace validation. Section C reproduces the core prompt clauses that connect the solver decision to generation, including the projection instruction, artifact edit mask, and skill-subgraph contract. It also records the shared base-line template and the strategy instruction that dis-tinguishes each fixed recipe. 

A.3 Artifact-Consistency Contract 

A materialized sample is a complete executable environment, not an instruction-only rewrite. The contract requires synchronized versions of (i) the natural-language instruction, (ii) input fixtures and 11 Table 4: Operational semantics of the Envs-FORGE action space and its restricted baseline views. The baseline correspondences describe approximate prompt semantics, not exact equivalence between generation procedures.                           

> Projection Agent-relative regime Permitted movement Invariants
> increase Seed is too easy Add one or two constraints, edge cases, larger fixtures, or stricter de-terministic outputs. Preserve the core skill subgraph; up-date the solution and tests to cover every added requirement.
> reduce Seed is too hard Remove secondary systems or re-place brittle infrastructure with a smaller bridge task. Preserve the target skill path and its es-sential artifacts; simplification must not collapse the task into an unrelated prob-lem.
> diversify Seed is near the fron-tier Change fixtures, neighboring require-ments, or scenario while keeping sim-ilar difficulty. Avoid unrelated breadth jumps; synchro-nize expected outputs and verifier logic with the new fixture. Restricted policy Mask in the per-task action space Interpretation few-shot (a, d )=(diversify ,in_depth )
> Approximate semantics: generate a close seed-conditioned variant while preserving the seed’s core structure. Self-Instruct (a, d )=(diversify ,in_breadth )
> Approximate semantics: invent a related task in the same domain with synchronized artifacts. Evol-Instruct depth d=in_depth Approximate semantics: fix the evolution direction to deeper constraints or reasoning steps. Evol-Instruct breadth d=in_breadth Approximate semantics: fix the evolution direction to a neigh-boring skill or task type.

Table 5: Skill-node taxonomy used for candidate metadata. These nodes define the required set Ri,a,d and optional addable or removable set Oi,a,d attached to each action candidate; they are metadata tags for the action contract rather than separate generation artifacts.                                    

> Category Skill nodes Domain system_admin ,data_processing ,testing ,security ,ml_ops ,game_reasoning
> Tool bash ,python ,systemd ,docker ,sql ,node
> Artifact logs ,csv ,json ,jsonl ,source_code ,config
> Operation merge ,parse ,repair ,configure ,generate_tests ,rank ,validate
> Constraint concurrency ,scheduling ,atomicity
> FORGE-added nodes edge_cases ,structured_output ,deterministic_sorting ,alternate_fixture ,
> neighboring_constraint ,file_level_simulation ,deterministic_fixture

data, (iii) the oracle solution, (iv) executable tests and reward logic, and (v) the container environ-ment. Added requirements must be visible in the instruction and tested by the verifier; removed re-quirements must disappear from both the oracle and tests. The container may expose task fixtures but may not package the oracle solution or hidden tests into the agent-visible environment. Verification has two layers. Static checks re-ject malformed schemas, unsafe paths, missing re-quired files, inconsistent reward output, excessive prompt length, and overlap with held-out evalua-tion tasks. Executable checks then build the iso-lated environment, run the oracle solution, and in-voke the generated tests. A task is accepted only when the verifier emits reward 1. This gold re-ward certifies internal task consistency; it is dis-tinct from the downstream policy reward used to estimate learning difficulty. 

A.4 Preprocessing, Training, and Evaluation Protocol Normalization and filtering. Accepted bundles are normalized into a common Terminal-Bench-style schema before conversion to training records. Each method contributes exactly 100 accepted bun-dles to the downstream RL source; failed candi-dates, repair attempts, and intermediate material-izations are excluded from that source. The con-version verifies the Docker specification and test entry point, standardizes task metadata, and drops invalid filesystem artifacts. Prompt length is com-puted with the target tokenizer, the actual agent system prompt, and the full chat template. The ex-perimental protocol uses a 4096-token threshold for the smaller settings and an 8192-token threshold 12 Table 6: MILP notation and implementation boundary. Candidate scores and metadata are constants when the solver is invoked.                             

> Symbol Meaning Symbol Meaning
> siSeed environment bundle ˆpiCurrent policy pass-rate estimate on seed ia, d Projection and evolution direction ˜pi,a,d Predicted pass rate after applying (a, d )
> Fi,a,d Frontier utility of a candidate xi,a,d Binary candidate-selection variable
> Ri,a,d Required skill nodes Oi,a,d Optional addable or removable skill nodes
> ui,a,d,v Binary activation of skill node vξvContinuous shortfall for target coverage mv;capped by ¯ξ= 0 .2in reported experiments
> NSelected seed–action count in indexed port-folio form; one per local task
> ρb,a,d Constant action mask for restricted baseline
> b

for the 35B setting; filtering statistics are recorded before training, and prompts are not silently trun-cated. 

Preflight validation. Before a training run, the pipeline loads every normalized task, rechecks the configured train/evaluation split and overlap filters, builds representative containers, and executes the same oracle-plus-test path used during synthesis. These checks are completed before model workers are launched so that container or verifier failures cannot consume rollout budget. Seed and evalu-ation splits remain separate throughout selection and downstream evaluation. 

Optimization and rollout configuration. The reported 35B policy is trained with GRPO using test-derived rewards and no learned reward model. Training uses FSDP2 with parameter and activation offload, gradient checkpointing, and bfloat16 com-putation. vLLM generates asynchronous rollouts with eight samples per prompt, temperature 1.0, top-p 0.9, a 1024-token response cap, and at most 50 agent steps; the key-value cache uses FP8. The 35B run uses two H800 80 GB GPUs for training, while Pass@1 evaluation uses one H800 80 GB GPU. All methods use the same downstream train-ing and evaluation protocol; only their synthesized training sources differ. 

Evaluation scope. The evaluation compares the complete frontier-aware and verifier-backed pipeline under the shared downstream protocol. Each method exports 100 verified environments, and its synthesis totals remain within the same broad operational range as the other methods. A solver-off comparison over an identical candidate pool would add a component-level analysis of se-lector behavior. 

A.5 Qualitative Frontier Cases 

Figure 5 traces five verified environments from seed contracts through policy-relative action selec-tion, synchronized materialization, and executable verification. For each case, the figure reports the estimated seed pass rate, the projected rate and frontier score under the selected action, the con-crete contract changes, and the preserved skill path. The red, blue, and green panels cover complex-ity increase, complexity reduction, and frontier di-versification. Original-to-synthesized instruction excerpts for all five cases appear in Section C.3. 

Case I: frontier-guided hardening of a near-frontier Bash task. The Bash seed already exer-cises recursive traversal, concurrency, and idempo-tence, and its estimated pass rate of 0.747 places it slightly on the easy side of the target frontier. The selected depth increase projects the pass rate to 0.497 and receives a frontier score of 0.9999 .The materialized environment keeps the Bash exe-cution path but replaces loosely structured text arti-facts with deterministic JSON summaries, includ-ing nested traversal, unusual filenames, C-locale ordering, file locking, and atomic writes. These additions create observable failure modes in the generated tests instead of merely lengthening the instruction. 

Case II: verifier-facing hardening of a saturated merger. The original multi-format merger has an estimated pass rate of 1.0, so another close para-phrase would provide little learning signal. Its se-lected depth increase retains CSV, JSONL, and JSON parsing while projecting the rate to 0.750 .The new contract defines the exact union key, treat-ment of missing fields, standards-compliant quot-ing, header schema, and deterministic row order. A superficially plausible merge is insufficient: the agent must satisfy edge-case and artifact-level re-quirements that the oracle and tests enforce jointly. 13 Increase complexity ( in_depth ): harden easy and near-frontier seeds 

Case I Bash logs 

near frontier 

Seed contract 

Recursively process nested .log 

files; update processed logs and per-directory summaries; remain idempotent under repeated and concurrent runs. 

Capability: ˆp = 0 .747 (slightly easy). 

MILP: increase_complexity:in_depth 

Frontier score 0.9999 ; projected ˆp′ =0.497 .

Materialization: JSON log processor 

Adds structured summaries, special-character filenames, C-locale sorting, file locks, and atomic writes. 

Skill and artifact effect 

Preserves Bash traversal and concur-rency while strengthening determin-istic structured output. Instruction, fixtures, oracle, tests, and container are co-edited. 

Verifier: static pass; oracle reward 

1.0.

Case II Data merger 

too easy 

Seed contract 

Merge CSV, JSONL, and JSON records into one CSV with email, phone, and status fields. 

Capability: ˆp = 1 .000 (satu-rated). 

MILP: increase_complexity:in_depth 

Frontier score 0.4578 ; projected ˆp′ =0.750 .

Materialization: deterministic merger 

Requires an exact email union, empty-string missing values, standards-compliant quoting, exact headers, and sorted rows. 

Skill and artifact effect 

Preserves multi-source parsing but makes edge cases and output order executable test conditions rather than prompt-only wording. 

Verifier: static pass; oracle reward 

1.0.

Reduce complexity ( in_depth ): construct deterministic bridge environments 

Case III Systemd logs 

too hard 

Seed contract 

Deploy a systemd unit, JSON-logging application, rsyslog, logrotate, and journal-based moni-toring. 

Capability: ˆp = 0 .000 (un-solved in recorded rollouts). 

MILP: reduce_complexity:in_depth 

Frontier score 0.4578 ; projected ˆp′ =0.250 .

Materialization: log-analyzer bridge 

Replaces live services with JSON fixtures; de-tects restart loops, counts warnings/errors, ranks recent errors, and flags malformed fields. 

Skill and artifact effect 

Preserves log parsing, validation, fail-ure detection, ranking, and structured reports while removing service de-ployment and concurrency noise. 

Verifier: static pass; oracle reward 

1.0.

Case IV Token service 

too hard 

Seed contract 

Implement Spring Boot access/re-fresh rotation, one-time Web-Socket tokens, database state, and race-safe concurrent operations. 

Capability: ˆp = 0 .000 .

MILP: reduce_complexity:in_depth 

Frontier score 0.4578 ; projected ˆp′ =0.250 .

Materialization: file-level validator 

Uses deterministic configuration, token events, and reference time; requires validation, repair, status labeling, risk scoring, and ranking. 

Skill and artifact effect 

Preserves expiry, revocation, token consumption, repair, and security-state reasoning while removing the web stack, database, and races. 

Verifier: static pass; oracle reward 

1.0.

Diversify frontier ( in_breadth ): vary the instance without shifting the skill family 

Case V PGN repair 

at frontier 

Seed contract 

Repair corrupted PGN games, validate legal chess moves, pre-serve headers, and emit structured analysis. 

Capability: ˆp = 0 .533 (near target). 

MILP: diversify_frontier:in_breadth 

Frontier score 0.9862 ; projected ˆp′ =0.533 .

Materialization: diversified PGN repair 

Changes the fixture and illegal move ( 15. Kf9 → 15. Kf1 ) while retaining legal-move checks and structured outputs. 

Skill and artifact effect 

Preserves chess parsing, header han-dling, and validator structure while creating a neighboring instance at the same intended difficulty. 

Verifier: static pass; oracle reward 

1.0.

Figure 5: Detailed agentic case study of policy-relative environment synthesis. Each row follows a seed contract through the MILP decision and synchronized materialization to its preserved learning signal and verification result. The capability estimate ˆp, projected rate ˆp′, and frontier score motivate each action: red panels denote complexity increases for easy seeds, blue panels denote deterministic reductions for seeds unsolved in the recorded rollouts, and the green panel denotes frontier-preserving diversification. All five materializations co-edit the required task artifacts, pass static validation, and obtain oracle reward 1.0. These traces illustrate selection and consistency semantics; downstream effects are evaluated by the benchmark results. 

14 Case III: a deterministic bridge from system de-ployment to log reasoning. The systemd seed combines application code with service installa-tion, rsyslog, log rotation, and journal monitor-ing, yielding an estimated pass rate of 0.0. Envs-FORGE selects reduction because the seed was un-solved in the recorded rollouts. The bridge replaces live services with deterministic JSON fixtures but preserves restart-loop detection, severity counting, malformed-record validation, recent-error ranking, and structured reporting. The projected rate rises to 

0.250 , making the environment easier without dis-carding the log-analysis skill chain that motivated the seed. 

Case IV: isolating security-state reasoning from a full web stack. The token-service seed is also estimated at 0.0 because it couples refresh rotation and one-time WebSocket tokens with framework setup, persistent database state, and race-safe con-currency. The reduced environment fixes config-uration, event records, and reference time, then asks the agent to validate, repair, label, score, and rank token states. This removes Java, web-server, database, and concurrency overhead while retain-ing expiry, revocation, consumption, repair, and risk reasoning. The result is a projected 0.250 

bridge task whose reward focuses on the intended security transitions rather than deployment failures. 

Case V: frontier-preserving chess diversification. 

The PGN seed is already near the frontier at 0.533 ,so increasing or reducing its intended difficulty is unnecessary. The selected breadth action retains chess parsing, header preservation, legal-move val-idation, and structured repair, but changes the cor-rupted game and concrete illegal move from 15. Kf9 to its legal repair 15. Kf1 . Its projected pass rate remains 0.533 and the frontier score is 0.9862 .This example separates useful instance diversity from uncontrolled task drift: the fixture changes, whereas the skill family and verifier structure re-main stable. 

Cross-case interpretation. Together, the cases show why a mixed seed pool needs more than one fixed evolution direction. The same action space calls for hardening when a seed is saturated, reduc-tion when infrastructure masks the target reasoning skill, and breadth diversification when the seed is already near the frontier. In every case, the instruc-tion, fixtures, oracle, tests, and environment are updated under one artifact contract, and the ora-cle obtains reward 1 after static validation. These traces establish internal executability and synchro-nization; the downstream performance evidence is reported in Section 4.2. 

B MILP Solution Procedure 

This section details how the environment-synthesis policy in Section 3.3 is instantiated and solved. Envs-FORGE uses PySCIPOpt as the modeling interface and SCIP as the solver. The optimiza-tion unit is a synthesis action, not a generated token, artifact, or training step. For each seed, the candidate set combines one of three difficulty projections with an in-depth or in-breadth evolu-tion direction. Each candidate specifies a complete pre-materialization contract: the intended difficulty movement, evolution direction, frontier score, and required or optional skill nodes. The MILP selects which contract is materialized into an executable environment. 

Model assembly. For every eligible candidate 

c = ( i, a, d ), the implementation creates a binary action variable xc. In the core per-task instance, the local cardinality constraint selects exactly one of the six candidates for the current seed. The in-dexed equations also include a cardinality target 

N for stacking local instances and allow shared skill-coverage constraints. Binary variables uc,v 

expose the skill subgraph induced by a selected action, and continuous variables ξv record shortfall against configured coverage targets. Active slack is bounded by ¯ξ = 0 .2 in the reported experiments. All frontier scores, eligibility indicators, and skill sets are computed before model construction, so Eqs. 3–10 remain linear. Candidates that fail de-terministic eligibility, overlap, or prompt-length checks are removed before optimization. The formulation requires no big-M constants. A required skill satisfies uc,v = xc, a forbidden skill is fixed to zero, and an optional skill satisfies 

uc,v ≤ xc with a small activation penalty. The implementation allocates these linking variables over a uniform candidate–skill index to keep the decoded solver payload auditable. The primary combinatorial choice is which of the six synthesis-action variables to activate for each seed. Skill-variable values are fixed or bounded by xc, and SCIP presolve can remove much of this determinis-tic structure. Soft coverage terms use ξv to tolerate at most 0.2 shortfall on active targets. 15 Branch-and-cut search. For this linear mixed-integer model, SCIP’s exact search is appropri-ately described as branch-and-cut . Presolve fixes linked skill variables, removes redundant rows, and tightens the remaining domains. SCIP then solves LP relaxations to obtain dual bounds, branches on fractional action decisions, separates valid cut-ting planes, propagates bound changes through the constraint system, and applies primal heuristics to obtain feasible action sets. Search continues un-til the primal–dual gap is closed and optimality is certified, or until SCIP returns another termina-tion status. The implementation reports that status explicitly before any decoded action is used. 

Recorded environment-synthesis solve. The recorded run contains 100 seeds and six projection– direction candidates per seed, giving 600 primary action variables. It requests 100 synthesized envi-ronments, uses active coverage slack cap ¯ξ = 0 .2,and PySCIPOpt reports status=optimal with ob-jective value 49 .9104 . Since the target count equals the seed count, the run still exports one selected ac-tion per seed. The coverage slack records bounded shortfall for active skill targets and conditions the decoded skill payload; it does not change the down-stream export size of 100 verified environments. Alternative portfolio settings with smaller N or tighter coverage slack would create a stronger cross-seed allocation problem. 

Solution decoding and audit trail. The im-plementation accepts the SCIP path only when PySCIPOpt reports optimal . Selected x and u

variables are decoded with a 0.5 threshold, af-ter which the action contract and induced skill subgraph are passed to the environment-synthesis prompt. The trace records the backend, formula-tion, status, objective value, candidate and target counts, requested coverage, realized slack, selected actions, and selected skill nodes. The objective value is a solver audit quantity for Eq. 3; down-stream Pass@1 is measured separately after RL training. 

Fallback and correctness boundary. For porta-bility, an unavailable PySCIPOpt installation or a non-optimal SCIP status triggers a backend-explicit fallback: exact enumeration is attempted only when the candidate list contains at most 24 entries, and larger instances use a deterministic coverage-aware greedy policy. Every selected item retains the back-end label, and the recorded planning trace uses PySCIPOpt rather than either fallback. Solver opti-mality certifies the discrete selection problem de-fined by the input coefficients and constraints. Se-mantic consistency of the generated environment is certified separately by synchronized artifact ma-terialization and the post-generation gold-solution verifier described in Section A.3. 

C Prompt and Task-Instruction Excerpts 

This section reproduces the prompt clauses that determine synthesis strategy and artifact consis-tency. For readability, we omit package-manager and mirror fallbacks, repeated JSON-schema boil-erplate, task-specific file locations, and repeated output-format instructions. The excerpts retain the clauses that distinguish the compared strategies, de-fine the synchronized-artifact contract, and specify task semantics. 

C.1 Shared Baseline Synthesis Contract 

The four prompting baselines call the same artifact-generation template. They differ only in the strat-egy and evolution-direction fields injected after the shared contract. 

> Shared baseline prompt (core excerpt)
> Synthesize one Terminal-Bench-style task directory from the seed task. Return exactly one JSON object, with top-level keys task_name, instruction_md, files, and metadata.
> • Create a small but real task variant rather than restating the seed. • Rewrite the user-facing instruction and synchronize the oracle solution, test runner, verifier tests, execution environment, and any changed fixtures or helper files. • Keep the container build context valid, pin the runtime, and ensure that every command used by the solution and tests exists in the generated environment. • Make the tests verify the generated instruction and solution. Every tested threshold, tie-break, filename, output key, or fixture value must be stated in the in-struction rather than hidden in the verifier. • Make the test runner write reward 1 on success and reward 0 on failure, including when the underlying test command fails. • Before returning, mentally execute the build, oracle solution, and verifier; the expected result is reward 1. The runtime suffix supplies the selected strategy instruc-tion, evolution direction, sample index, synthesis model, seed name, and shortened seed files for structural refer-ence.

16 Baseline-specific strategy injection 

few_shot ; direction: none. “Create a close variant that preserves the seed task structure while changing concrete requirements and verifier expectations.” 

self_instruct ; direction: none. “Invent a related ter-minal task in the same domain with its own task descrip-tion, solution, and verifier.” 

evol_instruct_in_depth ; direction: in_depth .

“Deepen the seed by adding a harder constraint or edge case and update solution and tests accordingly.” 

evol_instruct_in_breadth ; direction: in_breadth .

“Broaden the seed into a neighboring task type while keeping the same Terminal-Bench directory contract.” 

The shared template controls artifact complete-ness, whereas the injected sentence fixes how the baseline moves from the seed. Few-shot stays struc-turally close, Self-Instruct permits a related same-domain task, and the two Evol-Instruct variants commit to depth or breadth before observing the policy-relative reward band. 

Shared baseline repair prompt (core excerpt) 

Repair a failed generated Terminal-Bench-style task directory. Return one complete JSON object rather than patch fragments. 

• Make instruction_md identical to the generated in-struction file after trimming whitespace. • Make the oracle solve exactly that instruction and make both verifier layers test exactly that instruction and oracle behavior. • Include every changed fixture or helper file, preserve a buildable environment context, and pin the runtime. • State exact verifier expectations in the instruction and always emit reward 0 or 1 even when the test command fails. • Re-evaluate the build–solve–test path and target oracle reward 1. The repair call receives the strategy, evolution direction, repair index, failure summary, previous artifact JSON, and seed files. Repair preserves the baseline policy while correcting parsing, build, static-validation, or oracle-verification failures. 

C.2 Solver-Conditioned Envs-FORGE Prompt 

Envs-FORGE retains the same complete-environment output contract but conditions generation on an optimized action. The prompt receives a solver payload, a projection instruction, an evolution-direction instruction, an artifact edit mask, and a skill subgraph before it sees the seed files. 

Solver payload and Envs-FORGE objective (core ex-cerpt) 

The payload records the seed pass-rate estimate and reward band, the selected projection ,

evolution_direction , and combined 

action_variant , together with the projected pass rate, frontier score, and target difficulty. The prompt objective is: • project the seed toward the current policy’s learning frontier; • preserve the target skill subgraph rather than jumping to an unrelated easy task; • increase easy seeds, reduce hard seeds into bridge tasks, and diversify frontier seeds near their current difficulty; • materialize the selected action as one synchronized executable environment. The six possible action variants are the Cartesian prod-uct of increase_complexity , reduce_complexity , or 

diversify_frontier with in_depth or in_breadth .

Projection and evolution-direction instructions 

increase_complexity . The seed appears easy. Add one or two concrete constraints, edge cases, stricter output requirements, or a larger fixture while preserving the seed skill subgraph. 

reduce_complexity . The seed appears beyond the cur-rent agent. Split away secondary systems or create a smaller bridge task while preserving the target skill sub-graph and its important artifacts. 

diversify_frontier . The seed is near the frontier. Keep difficulty similar, diversify data and constraints, and avoid large simplification or unrelated breadth jumps. 

in_depth . Strengthen constraints and edge cases without changing the core skill graph. 

in_breadth . Vary fixtures, neighboring constraints, or surrounding context while keeping difficulty in the same neighborhood. 

Artifact edit masks (core operators) 

Let I NST , D ATA , S OL , T EST , E NV , and H ELP denote the instruction, fixtures, oracle solution, tests, environment, and helper files. 

increase_complexity . Required: I NST , D ATA , S OL ,TEST ; optional: ENV , H ELP . Operators add explicit constraints and edge cases, change or enlarge fixtures, update the algorithm, and strengthen checks for boundary cases and deterministic outputs. 

reduce_complexity . Required: INST , D ATA , S OL ,TEST , E NV ; optional: H ELP . Operators split secondary systems, replace live dependencies with deterministic fix-tures, rewrite the solution for a bridge task, test the core skill only, and simplify the runtime. 

diversify_frontier . Required: INST , D ATA , S OL ,TEST ; optional: E NV , H ELP . Operators reframe at similar difficulty, replace fixtures while preserving scale, update expected logic while retaining the solution shape, and preserve verifier granularity. 

17 Skill-subgraph and generation contract 

The skill-subgraph prompt exposes three sets. 

preserve_nodes must remain observable in the generated instruction and verifier; additions must come from allowed_added_nodes ; and a reduction may remove or simulate allowed_removed_nodes only when the preserved core remains testable. The model must treat every artifact in required_artifacts as a mandatory synchronized edit and restrict each edit to the operator families in the selected mask. The remaining clauses require a compact runnable arti-fact, favor reuse of the seed runtime, permit deterministic file-level simulations for reduced system tasks, prohibit hidden test constraints, and require the same build–oracle– verifier mental execution used by the baselines. The re-turned metadata stores the solver payload alongside the target difficulty and projection summary. 

The difference from a fixed baseline appears up-stream of generation: a baseline injects one prede-termined strategy sentence, whereas Envs-FORGE injects a policy-relative solver decision plus ex-plicit skill and artifact constraints. Both families are held to the same executable-environment and gold-verification standard. 

C.3 Original-to-Synthesized Instruction Excerpts 

The following five pairs retain the clauses that de-fine the task, its edge cases, and its verifier-facing outputs. Repeated file locations and delivery boil-erplate are omitted. The colors match Figure 5. 

Case I: Bash log processor → JSON log processor Original instruction, core clauses. 

• Fix a Bash script that recursively processes every log file, records each filename and line count in a global output and per-directory summaries, and sorts by file-name. • Make all updates atomic, restartable, deterministic, and safe under repeated or concurrent execution; pro-cess each file exactly once and handle spaces or special characters in filenames. 

Synthesized instruction, core clauses. 

• Replace plain-text outputs with a processed JSON array, one JSON summary per directory, and a top-level directory-count summary. • Recursively handle nested and unusual filenames, cor-rectly count empty and non-newline-terminated files, sort under the C locale, write through temporary-file replacement, protect updates with a file lock, and re-main idempotent. 

Case II: multi-format merger → deterministic sorted merger Original instruction, core clauses. 

• Read one CSV, one JSONL file, and one JSON file with potentially non-standard schemas; output email, phone, and status for every unique email in the union. • Do not print complete inputs, and emit a standard three-column CSV with a header. 

Synthesized instruction, core clauses. 

• Preserve the union semantics but require determin-istic ascending email order and the exact header 

email,phone,status .• Represent missing values as empty strings and use standards-compliant CSV quoting for commas, quotes, and newlines; the output must remain deterministic across runs. 

Case III: systemd log monitoring → log-analyzer bridge Original instruction, core clauses. 

• Deploy a continuously running JSON-logging appli-cation as a systemd service, route its journal through rsyslog, rotate the resulting files, and provide a health-monitoring script. • Detect restart loops and errors over a recent time win-dow, emit a dynamic JSON report, and validate service management, routing, permissions, rotation, and end-to-end integration. 

Synthesized instruction, core clauses. 

• Analyze deterministic newline-delimited JSON fix-tures instead of a live service stack. Detect more than three restart events in a five-minute window, count warnings and errors, and rank the five most recent errors. • Record malformed JSON or missing fields, handle empty and unreadable fixtures without crashing, and emit one deterministic structured report using only the standard library. 

Case IV: full-stack token service → file-level token validator Original instruction, core clauses. 

• Implement a Java/Spring service backed by H2 that issues access, refresh, and one-time WebSocket tokens with different lifetimes and storage semantics. • Rotate refresh tokens atomically, ensure exactly one success under concurrent renewal or consumption, re-voke all user tokens on logout, and periodically delete expired, revoked, or consumed state. 

Synthesized instruction, core clauses. 

• Read deterministic configuration, token-event records, and a fixed reference time; compute expiry, revocation, and one-time-token consumption status. • Repair eligible recently used expired tokens, assign risk scores for expired, revoked, consumed, and high-risk-user conditions, then sort by descending risk and ascending token identifier in a structured JSON output. 

18 Case V: PGN repair and puzzles → diversified PGN repair Original instruction, core clauses.    

> • Repair multiple corrupted PGN games by detecting il-legal, missing, and ambiguous moves; identify critical positions and tactical patterns. • Solve FEN-based puzzles, including mate-in-Nin-stances, and return repaired games, puzzle continua-tions, and aggregate analysis.
> Synthesized instruction, core clauses.
> • Repair one corrupted game containing exactly one illegal move, 15. Kf9 , whose required correction is
> 15. Kf1 .• Validate every move with python-chess , preserve all PGN headers, and return the original PGN, repaired PGN, and a structured error record. No other error is present.

All five synthesized instructions were material-ized with synchronized fixtures, oracle solutions, tests, and environments. Static validation passed and each oracle obtained reward 1. As in Figure 5, this establishes internal consistency of the gener-ated task bundles; downstream policy accuracy is reported in the benchmark results. 

D Compute Resources 

For each prompt, we sample 8 rollouts with temper-ature 1.0 and top-p = 0 .9. The training batch size, PPO mini-batch size, and per-GPU micro-batch size are all set to 1. Both the maximum prompt length and maximum response length are set to 

8192 tokens. Each trajectory allows at most 50 

agent-environment interaction steps, with a trajec-tory timeout of 900 seconds. The actor learning rate is set to 1 × 10 −6. We train for one epoch, enable automatic checkpoint resume, and save a checkpoint at every step; after training finishes, only the final actor model weights are retained. Re-wards are computed solely from Terminal-Bench test outcomes, with test reward weight 1 and judge reward weight 0. We do not include a KL term in the reward. Training is conducted on 2 H800 80GB GPUs. The actor, reference policy, and rollout en-gine share the same visible GPUs. We use FSDP2 for distributed training, with gradient checkpoint-ing, activation offloading, and FSDP offload policy enabled to reduce GPU memory usage. Rollouts are generated asynchronously by the vLLM hy-brid engine with tensor parallel size 2. The model weights use bfloat16 precision, the KV cache uses FP8, and both the maximum model length and max-imum number of batched tokens are set to 32 k.The current runs require two H800 80 GB GPUs with Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP) and CPU offload for training, plus one H800 80 GB GPU for evaluation. Environment synthesis also requires candidate generation, MILP selection, container builds, and executable verification. Larger seed pools or larger backbones will increase synthesis, training, and evaluation cost. 19