Title: Spider 2.0-AIFunc: Extending Real-World Text-to-SQL to AI-Native SQL Workflows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.06229v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Jul 2026 01:16:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
Preprint. 

# Spider 2.0-AIFunc: Extending Real-World Text-to-SQL to AI-Native SQL Workflows 

Tianyang Liu 1∗, Canwen Xu 2, Fangyu Lei 3, Nikki Lijing Kuang 2,Jixuan Chen 1, Tao Yu 3, Julian McAuley 1, Zhewei Yao 2, Yuxiong He 21UC San Diego 2Snowflake AI Research 3University of Hong Kong 

{til040,jmcauley}@ucsd.edu {canwen.xu,zhewei.yao,yuxiong.he}@snowflake.com 

GitHub ↗ HuggingFace ↗

# Abstract 

Major cloud data platforms now expose large language model capabili-ties as native SQL functions, enabling analysts to perform classification, filtering, sentiment analysis, extraction, similarity search, and aggregation within ordinary SQL queries. Yet existing text-to-SQL benchmarks evalu-ate only conventional SQL and provide no signal on whether models can generate such AI-native SQL. We introduce Spider 2.0-AIFunc, a bench-mark of 465 verified instances across 125 real-world databases covering six types of AI functions on the Snowflake platform. Starting from an ex-isting enterprise text-to-SQL benchmark, we construct Spider 2.0-AIFunc through an agent-based pipeline that rewrites source tasks into AI-native form, simultaneously transforming target queries and refining natural lan-guage instructions to make the intended AI-native solution explicit and reduce ambiguity. All instances pass a multi-round repeated execution protocol across temporally separated windows to confirm result stability before release. Evaluating ten state-of-the-art language models, we find that the strongest proprietary models reach 67–70% execution accuracy while the best open-source model achieves 58.1%, a gap driven primarily by errors in predicate specification, schema grounding, and AI function parameterization. Agent frameworks designed for traditional text-to-SQL challenges, such as schema retrieval and relevant table selection, do not transfer effectively to AI-native SQL: a minimal agent setup consistently matches or outperforms more elaborate alternatives, suggesting that the strategies these frameworks employ are less critical in this setting. 

# 1 Introduction 

Much of enterprise data analysis begins with questions that are easy to ask in natural language but awkward to express in traditional SQL: Which support tickets describe billing issues? Which survey responses mention churn risk? Which product reviews are negative, and what are customers complaining about? Consider the last case. A data analyst has a table of product reviews stored in a cloud data warehouse and wants to analyze their sentiment and categorize the negative ones by complaint type. Until recently, answering this kind of question meant extracting the text from the database, running sentiment analysis and classification models in a separate environment, and loading the results back. Today, on platforms like Snowflake, this can be done directly in SQL using AI functions such as 

AI_SENTIMENT and AI_CLASSIFY :

SELECT review_id, 

AI_SENTIMENT (review_text) AS sentiment, 

AI_CLASSIFY (review_text,[ 'shipping ', 'quality ', 'service ', 'pricing ']):labels AS complaint_type FROM product_reviews; 

> ∗

Work done during Tianyang Liu’s internship at Snowflake. 

1arXiv:2607.06229v1 [cs.CL] 7 Jul 2026 Preprint. 

Figure 1: An example of transforming a traditional SQL task into an AI-native SQL instance in S PIDER 2.0-AIF UNC . The original instruction and gold SQL are rewritten to incorporate a Snowflake Cortex AI function ( AI_SIMILARITY ). Highlighted spans indicate the injected AI requirement and the corresponding SQL transformation. Such functions can be combined with standard SQL aggregations, filters, and joins, en-abling analysts to express semantic operations over unstructured text within ordinary SQL queries (Snowflake, 2026). Snowflake is not alone in this direction. BigQuery (Google Cloud, 2026), Databricks (Databricks, 2026), and other major cloud platforms have all introduced SQL-callable AI functions, enabling a broad spectrum of semantic operations, from text classification and sentiment analysis to similarity search and information extraction, to be expressed directly within SQL queries. In enterprise settings, analysts increasingly compose these AI functions with conventional SQL operators to build AI-native SQL workflows that would have previously required separate toolchains. Text-to-SQL benchmarks have steadily evolved toward more realistic evaluation set-tings (Liu et al., 2025). WikiSQL (Zhong et al., 2017) introduced large-scale evaluation over simple single-table queries. Spider 1.0 (Yu et al., 2019) raised the complexity with cross-database generalization, joins, and nested subqueries. BIRD (Li et al., 2023) brought in real-world database values and external knowledge. Most recently, Spider 2.0 (Lei et al., 2025) and BEAVER (Chen et al., 2025) moved to enterprise-level workflows with multi-dialect SQL over databases that often exceed 1,000 columns. These benchmarks have collectively driven significant progress in text-to-SQL research. At the same time, they all target SQL queries composed entirely of conventional SQL operators over structured data. Given the growing adoption of AI functions in enterprise SQL workflows, as described above, a natural next step is to extend text-to-SQL evaluation to cover AI-native SQL, where the expected output includes AI function calls alongside traditional SQL operations. Figure 1 shows a representative example of this transformation. To this end, Spider 2.0-AIFunc extends Spider2-Snow (Lei et al., 2025) by rewriting its source tasks into AI-native SQL versions. Starting from 513 Spider2-Snow instances, each with its original instruction, one or more gold SQL queries, their execution results, the database schema, and optional external knowledge, we simultaneously transform the target SQL to incorporate Snowflake Cortex AI Functions and revise the corresponding instruction to match. When a source instance has multiple valid gold SQLs, we further refine the instruction to reduce ambiguity and make the expected AI-native SQL query more explicitly specified. We design a reusable, agent-based pipeline to carry out this construction: agents interact directly with the Snowflake environment, proposing modifications to both the SQL and the instruction, executing the resulting query against the database, and iteratively resolving execution errors, timeouts, and malformed outputs until the query returns rea-sonable results within an acceptable time frame. The agents also check that AI function parameters are explicitly specified (e.g., the complete set of class labels for AI_CLASSIFY )and that the instruction clearly indicates the expected AI function usage. After construction, each instance goes through a verification stage where a separate agent executes the gold SQL multiple times across several passes, repairing instances that produce inconsistent results. 2Preprint. The benchmark is constructed in two rounds: a main round and a diversity round that broadens coverage across AI function types. The released benchmark comprises 465 verified instances across 125 databases, covering six types of Snowflake Cortex AI Functions. We evaluate a range of state-of-the-art language models on Spider 2.0-AIFunc using the Spider-Agent framework (Lei et al., 2025), where each model is provided with a minimal tool set consisting of bash for exploring database schemas and external knowledge, a SQL execution tool for running queries against Snowflake, and a task termination tool. Models are additionally given reference documentation for the relevant Snowflake Cortex AI Functions. Among the models we evaluate, Claude Opus 4.6 achieves the highest execution accuracy at 70.3%, followed by Claude Sonnet 4.6 at 69.0% and Gemini 3.1 Pro at 67.1%. A consistent gap emerges between proprietary and open-source models: the strongest proprietary models cluster in the 67–70% range, while the best open-source model reaches 58.1% and the remaining open-source models range from 44.9% to 57.0%. Agent frameworks specifically designed for traditional text-to-SQL challenges do not transfer effectively to AI-native SQL: three such frameworks, when given the same backbone model and AI function documentation, match but do not exceed the minimal Spider-Agent baseline. 

# 2 Background and Preliminaries 

2.1 Spider2-Snow 

Spider 2.0 (Lei et al., 2025) is an enterprise-level text-to-SQL benchmark comprising 632 real-world workflow problems over databases sourced from industrial applications such as Google Analytics and Salesforce, hosted across multiple database systems including BigQuery, Snowflake, SQLite, DuckDB, and PostgreSQL. It offers several evaluation settings of varying complexity. Spider 2.0-AIFunc builds on Spider2-Snow , a self-contained text-to-SQL setting in which all 547 examples are hosted entirely on Snowflake. In Spider2-Snow, given a natural language question Q, a database schema D, and auxiliary documentation 

E, a text-to-SQL parser f (·) is required to produce the corresponding SQL query S =

f (Q, D, E | θ). Performance is measured by checking whether the predicted SQL produces the same result as the gold SQL when executed against the database. A notable aspect of Spider 2.0’s evolution is that each task was originally released with a single gold SQL query; however, as more teams submitted results and explored alternative solutions, the maintainers discovered that many tasks admit multiple valid SQL queries that produce different correct results, leading to ongoing updates to the evaluation suite. 

2.2 Snowflake Cortex AI Functions 

Snowflake Cortex AI Functions (Snowflake, 2026) are a family of built-in SQL functions provided by the Snowflake platform that invoke large language models as part of query execution. Users call these functions in SQL statements just like conventional SQL functions, but instead of performing deterministic operations such as arithmetic or string manipulation, they perform semantic operations such as classification, sentiment analysis, information extraction, and similarity computation. A typical AI function takes one or more table columns (usually containing text) along with user-specified parameters as input, and returns its output as part of the query result. Because they conform to standard SQL syntax, AI functions can be freely composed with traditional SQL operators such as WHERE , JOIN , GROUP BY , and aggregation functions within a single query. Under the hood, each AI function call is served by a language model available in the Snowflake environment. At any given point in time, the underlying model for each function is fixed, and inference is run with a temperature of zero, meaning that the same input should in principle produce the same output. In practice, however, prior work has shown that LLM outputs can exhibit minor inconsistencies even at temperature zero (He & Lab, 2025; Atil et al., 2025; Ouyang et al., 2025). This property is relevant to benchmarking because evaluation via execution accuracy requires that the gold SQL produces a stable result. We describe how we address this through multi-round execution verification in Section 3. 3Preprint. 

# 3 The Spider 2.0-AIFunc Benchmark 

Spider 2.0-AIFunc is built on top of Spider2-Snow by rewriting its source tasks to incorpo-rate Snowflake Cortex AI Functions into the target SQL. Constructing a benchmark around AI-native SQL introduces two challenges that do not arise in traditional text-to-SQL bench-marks. The first is specification determinism at the instruction level: AI functions introduce additional degrees of freedom beyond conventional SQL, including which function to use and how to specify its parameters (e.g., the set of class labels for a classification task). In-structions must be precise enough to determine these choices, or the notion of a correct answer becomes ill-defined. The second is execution determinism at the execution level: as discussed in §2.2, AI functions invoke language models whose outputs may vary slightly even under deterministic settings. The gold SQL must therefore produce a stable result for execution-based evaluation to be meaningful. Our construction process (§3.2) addresses specification determinism, and our verification protocol (§3.3) addresses execution deter-minism. We describe the task definition in §3.1, dataset statistics in §3.4, and evaluation setup in §3.5. 

3.1 Task Definition 

The input to each Spider 2.0-AIFunc task consists of a natural language instruction Q, a database schema D, auxiliary documentation E, and AI function reference documentation 

R. The first three components follow the same format as Spider2-Snow. The additional component R provides definitions, parameter specifications, and usage guidelines for the relevant Snowflake Cortex AI Functions, since these functions are relatively new and unlikely to be well represented in the training data of current language models. Given these inputs, a system f (·) (which may be a text-to-SQL parser, an LLM, or an agent framework) is required to produce a SQL query S = f (Q, D, E, R | θ) that includes one or more AI function calls alongside conventional SQL operations. During construction, we refine instructions to reduce ambiguity and make the intended AI function usage and parameters explicit, as discussed in §3.2. 

3.2 Task Construction 

Our construction starts from 513 Spider2-Snow source tasks. For each task, we take the original instruction, one or more gold SQL queries and their execution results, the database schema, and optional external knowledge as input. The goal is to produce an AI-native SQL version of the task by incorporating one or more Snowflake Cortex AI Functions into the tar-get SQL. The six AI function types covered in our benchmark are: AI_CLASSIFY for semantic classification, AI_FILTER for filtering rows by semantic relevance, AI_SENTIMENT for senti-ment analysis, AI_SIMILARITY for embedding-based similarity computation, AI_EXTRACT for extracting structured information from text, and AI_AGG for aggregating content across rows using natural language instructions. These represent a broad range of semantic operations that cannot be expressed with conventional SQL operators. Note that each task may incor-porate more than one AI function, and most tasks in our benchmark combine two functions within a single query. The construction is carried out by a reusable, agent-based pipeline using Claude Opus 4.5 (Anthropic, 2025) with a maximum of 15 interaction rounds per task. Agents interact directly with the databases, simultaneously proposing modifications to both the SQL and the instruction. For the SQL, agents inject or rewrite portions of the query to incorporate AI function calls. For the instruction, agents revise the wording to match the rewritten SQL; when a source task has multiple gold SQLs, the instruction is further refined to reduce ambiguity and make the intended query more explicit. Throughout this process, agents execute the candidate SQL against the database and iteratively resolve issues, including exe-cution errors, timeouts, and malformed outputs, until the query returns reasonable results within an acceptable time frame. The agents also verify that all AI function parameters are fully specified: for instance, that a call to AI_CLASSIFY includes the complete set of target labels, or that a call to AI_EXTRACT specifies the exact extraction schema. This addresses 4Preprint. specification determinism at construction time by making the intended AI-function choices and parameters explicit. The benchmark is constructed in two rounds. In the main round, agents select AI func-tions without constraints on function choice. This produces 513 candidate instances, but the resulting distribution is concentrated on three function types: AI_CLASSIFY appears in 78.6% of tasks, AI_FILTER in 50.1%, and AI_SIMILARITY in 45.6%, while AI_SENTIMENT 

(0.2%), AI_EXTRACT (1.2%), and AI_AGG (10.7%) remain rare. The two most frequent combina-tions, AI_CLASSIFY + AI_FILTER (35.3%) and AI_CLASSIFY + AI_SIMILARITY (33.7%), together account for 69% of all instances. This concentration reflects the broad applicability of clas-sification, filtering, and similarity operations across diverse analytical tasks, but it results in insufficient coverage of the remaining function types. To address this, we conduct a diversity round in which agents are explicitly instructed to prioritize underrepresented functions: AI_SENTIMENT as the highest priority, AI_EXTRACT as the second, and AI_AGG as the third. Agents are required to include at least one of these target functions in each task, but may reject a source instance if none of the target functions naturally fits the data and query intent. This yields 227 additional candidate instances with a complementary distribution: 

AI_AGG appears in 71.4% of diversity-round tasks, AI_EXTRACT in 31.3%, and AI_SENTIMENT 

in 15.0%. Instances from both rounds then proceed to the verification stage (§3.3); only those that pass are retained in the final release. The pipeline is designed to be general and can be adapted to construct future benchmarks for other AI functions or database platforms. 

3.3 Determinism Verification 

After construction, each candidate instance undergoes a multi-pass verification process to check execution determinism. The process consists of four consecutive passes: the first executes each gold SQL 5 times, and the subsequent three each execute it 10 times, totaling at least 35 executions per instance (additional executions may be triggered when repairs require re-verification). All passes are carried out by a verification agent (Claude Opus 4.5, maximum 15 interaction rounds). The agent is permitted to repair instances that produce inconsistent results: it may adjust the SQL, revise the instruction, or modify evaluation configuration such as whether row order should be compared. Beyond simple re-execution, the agent can run diagnostic SQL queries against the database to identify the source of inconsistencies before attempting a fix. Importantly, the agent also reviews instances that already pass consistency checks, examining whether the instruction sufficiently determines the intended AI function usage and whether the evaluation configuration is appropriate. This means the verification stage checks execution determinism while also reviewing resid-ual specification-determinism concerns that may have survived construction. An instance is considered consistent only when 100% of executions within a pass produce identical results under the same comparison logic used for final evaluation. After all four passes, we apply filtering: instances that remain inconsistent are removed, as are instances whose AI function usage was reduced or eliminated during repair. We additionally discard instances built on a small number of Spider2-Snow source databases that are not static snapshots and whose underlying tables may be updated over time, since such changes can alter the inputs passed to AI functions and make results unstable across evaluation periods. The surviving instances then enter a final stability check. Each instance is executed 10 times in each of three separate time windows, for a total of 30 additional executions. No repairs are made during this stage; any instance whose 10 executions within any single time window produce inconsistent results is dropped. This stage serves a different purpose from the repair-based passes: it checks that the released instances remain stable not only within a single session but also across temporally separated evaluations. After all verification and filtering stages, 465 instances (325 from the main round, 140 from the diversity round) across 125 databases constitute the final released benchmark. 

3.4 Dataset Statistics 

The final benchmark comprises 465 verified instances across 125 databases. Figure 2(a) shows the distribution of AI function types across all released instances. AI_CLASSIFY is the 5Preprint. 

Figure 2: (a) Distribution of AI function types across the 465 released instances. A single task may use multiple functions. (b) Function co-occurrence matrix. Diagonal entries indicate single-function tasks; off-diagonal entries indicate two-function combinations. most frequently used function, appearing in over half of all tasks, followed by AI_FILTER 

and AI_SIMILARITY at comparable rates. The diversity round substantially increased the representation of AI_AGG , AI_EXTRACT , and AI_SENTIMENT , which together now appear in over 40% of tasks. Two thirds of the tasks (66.0%) combine two AI functions within a single query, while 33.3% use a single function. Figure 2(b) presents the co-occurrence matrix across the six function types. Since Spider 2.0-AIFunc is built from Spider2-Snow source tasks, the gold SQL queries retain the characteristics of enterprise-level SQL: multi-table joins, common table expressions, and layered aggregations. AI function calls are embedded within these multi-step queries rather than appearing in isolation, meaning that a system must not only select and parameterize the correct AI functions but also integrate them into the surrounding query logic to produce the intended result. The gold queries average 65 lines and 2,617 characters in length, referencing an average of 3.9 tables per query. The gold query results average 23.1 rows (median 3) and 3.7 columns (median 3), with 91.8% of tasks returning 20 rows or fewer and 2.2% exceeding 100 rows. Execution times average 10.4 seconds (median 4.3 seconds), with 2.2% of instances requiring over a minute due to AI function invocations across large numbers of rows. 

3.5 Evaluation 

We evaluate using execution accuracy, following the framework of Spider2-Snow. In Spider2-Snow, the gold SQL result is pre-computed and stored; at evaluation time, only the predicted SQL is executed and compared against the stored result. In Spider 2.0-AIFunc, this approach is not viable: AI functions invoke language models that may be updated over time (§2.2), so a stored gold result may no longer reflect the current output of the same gold SQL. We therefore require that the gold SQL Sn and the predicted SQL ˆSn are both executed within the same time window t:

EX = 1

N

> N

# ∑

> n=1

1



exec (Sn, t), exec ( ˆSn, t)



(1) where exec (S, t) denotes the result of executing query S at time t, and the shared t ensures that both queries are evaluated against the same underlying model state. Let v = exec (Sn, t)

and ˆv = exec ( ˆSn, t). Following Spider2-Snow, the comparison function 1(v, ˆv) uses column-subset matching: 

1(v, ˆ v) = 

1 if vi ∈ ˆv, ∀ vi ∈ v

0 if vi /∈ ˆv, ∃ vi ∈ v (2) where vi denotes the i-th column of result v. That is, every column in the gold result must appear in the predicted result, but the predicted result may contain additional columns 6Preprint. Table 1: Execution accuracy on S PIDER 2.0-AIF UNC . Exec. reports the proportion of instances on which the predicted SQL ran without error or timeout. EX is execution accuracy. Best results within each group are highlighted. †GPT-5.4 results are reported with model-specific patches applied to address specific issues observed during evaluation; see Appendix A for details. 

Model Params Exec. (%) EX (%) 

> PROPRIETARY MODELS

Claude Opus 4.6 – 99.4 70.3 

Claude Sonnet 4.6 – 98.9 69.0 

Gemini 3.1 Pro – 97.8 67.1 

GPT-5.4 † – 97.6 63.0 

Gemini 3 Flash – 90.6 60.9 

> OPEN-SOURCE MODELS

Kimi K2.5 1000B / 32B 97.8 58.1 

Qwen 3.5 Plus 397B / 17B 97.2 57.0 

DeepSeek V3.2 671B / 37B 97.2 54.6 

GLM-5 744B / 40B 94.6 52.9 

MiniMax M2.5 230B / 10B 96.1 44.9 

without penalty. Each instance additionally carries an evaluation configuration that specifies whether row order should be compared or ignored. Float values are compared with a tolerance of 0.01, and columns are matched by content rather than by position. This comparison logic is identical to the one used during the verification stage (§3.3). 

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

We evaluate all models using the Spider-Agent framework (Lei et al., 2025), with a minimal tool set consisting of three general-purpose tools: a bash tool for exploring database schemas and external knowledge files, a SQL execution tool for running queries directly against the Snowflake environment, and a task termination tool for signaling completion. We delib-erately keep the tool set minimal to isolate model capability from framework complexity. Compared to the original Spider-Agent setup, the primary addition on the task side is the inclusion of AI function reference documentation R (defined in §3.1), which provides each model with definitions, parameter specifications, and usage guidelines for the relevant Snowflake Cortex AI Functions. The full prompt, including the reference documentation and usage guidelines, is provided in Appendix D. All agents are run with a maximum of 50 interaction rounds, a temperature of 1, and a per-query execution timeout of 120 seconds. For each model and task, we report one complete agent trajectory. To account for transient warehouse instability that may cause spurious timeouts, each predicted SQL is executed up to three times; a query is marked as timed out only if all three attempts exceed the timeout threshold. For models that expose a reasoning effort parameter, we set it to medium 

uniformly across all such models; models that do not support this parameter are run with their default configuration. We evaluate ten models spanning both closed-source and open-source families. On the closed-source side, we include Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026a) and Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026b), Gemini 3.1 Pro (Google, 2026) and Gemini 3 Flash (Google, 2025), and GPT-5.4 (OpenAI, 2026). On the open-source side, we include Kimi K2.5 (Team et al., 7Preprint. Table 2: Agent framework comparison on S PIDER 2.0-AIF UNC . All frameworks use Claude Sonnet 4.6 as the backbone model. 

Framework Exec. (%) EX (%) 

Spider-Agent 98.9 69.0 AutoLink (Wang et al., 2025) 98.7 68.6 ReFoRCE (Deng et al., 2025) 99.8 68.5 DSR-SQL (Hao et al., 2025) 100.0 62.2 2026), Qwen 3.5 Plus (Qwen Team, 2026), DeepSeek V3.2 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), GLM-5 (GLM-5-Team et al., 2026), and MiniMax M2.5 (MiniMax, 2026). We additionally compare three open-sourced agent frameworks, AutoLink (Wang et al., 2025), ReFoRCE (Deng et al., 2025), and DSR-SQL (Hao et al., 2025), each using Claude Sonnet 4.6 as the backbone model under their default configurations, to assess whether framework complexity confers any advantage on this benchmark. To ensure a fair comparison, we augment each framework with the same AI function reference documentation R used in the Spider-Agent setting, inserting it into all available system prompts across each framework’s internal stages; all other configurations are left unchanged. 

4.2 Main Results Models generally produce executable AI-native SQL across sufficient interaction rounds. 

Table 1 reports the results across all ten models. We measure two metrics: Exec. , the proportion of instances on which the predicted SQL ran without error, and execution accuracy ( EX ), which additionally requires the query to return the correct result. Across all models, Exec. is consistently high, ranging from 90.6% to 99.4%, suggesting that with sufficient interaction rounds, models can generally produce syntactically valid AI-native SQL that executes without error or timeout. 

Proprietary models consistently outperform open-source models. Among proprietary models, Claude Opus 4.6 achieves the highest accuracy at 70.3%, followed by Claude Sonnet 4.6 at 69.0% and Gemini 3.1 Pro at 67.1%. A notable gap emerges between proprietary and open-source models: the strongest proprietary models cluster in the 67–70% range, while the best open-source model, Kimi K2.5, reaches 58.1% and the remaining open-source models range from 44.9% to 57.0%. 

Agent frameworks designed for traditional text-to-SQL do not transfer effectively to AI-native SQL workflows. Table 2 compares Spider-Agent against three alternative agent frameworks, all using Claude Sonnet 4.6 as the backbone model under their default con-figurations and ranked by EX . Spider-Agent achieves 69.0%, matching AutoLink (68.6%) and ReFoRCE (68.5%), while DSR-SQL trails at 62.2% despite achieving the highest Exec. of 100%. These frameworks were originally designed for traditional text-to-SQL challenges such as schema retrieval and relevant table selection; their relative ineffectiveness here may reflect that such strategies are less critical as model capabilities improve, or that they do not transfer naturally to AI-native SQL workflows. Our qualitative inspection of disagreement cases suggests that these frameworks do transfer partially, but unevenly. They can help with conventional text-to-SQL components such as schema context, subtle filters, or multi-step SQL templates. However, AI-native SQL correctness often depends on small semantic decisions introduced by the AI-function call itself: which rows are passed into the function, whether filtering happens before or after the AI call, the aggregation grain, semi-structured field paths, and the exact function parameters. Decomposition, context selection, or intermediate rewriting can therefore introduce small deviations that offset the benefits of stronger traditional SQL scaffolding. Detailed per-function-type breakdowns, single- versus multi-function accuracy, AI function selection accuracy, and execution time analysis are reported in Appendix B. 8Preprint. Table 3: Agent interaction statistics averaged over all 465 instances. Rounds : average total interaction rounds. SQL and Bash : average number of execute_sql and bash calls. B/S :bash-to-SQL call ratio. Rnd-50 : proportion of instances reaching the 50-round limit. 1st SQL :average round of the first execute_sql call. 1st Succ. : average round of the first error-free SQL execution. 

Interaction volume (avg. per instance) Timing (avg. round) 

Model Rounds SQL Bash B/S Rnd-50 (%) 1st SQL 1st Succ. 

> PROPRIETARY MODELS

Claude Opus 4.6 11.7 5.9 4.9 1.09 0.0 5.7 5.7 

Claude Sonnet 4.6 10.0 4.9 4.1 1.42 0.0 4.9 5.3 

Gemini 3.1 Pro 17.1 10.2 5.8 0.79 0.6 5.6 6.6 

GPT-5.4 † 10.1 4.4 4.4 1.45 0.0 5.1 5.6 

Gemini 3 Flash 9.9 4.4 4.3 1.47 0.0 4.7 5.1 

> OPEN-SOURCE MODELS

Kimi K2.5 19.3 12.1 6.1 0.74 0.4 6.9 7.3 

Qwen 3.5 Plus 24.1 16.4 6.8 0.54 3.2 7.4 8.0 

DeepSeek V3.2 28.6 19.8 7.8 0.45 0.4 7.8 8.2 

GLM-5 24.5 14.4 7.0 0.94 6.2 8.0 8.4 

MiniMax M2.5 30.0 19.1 6.7 0.47 10.8 7.7 8.7 

4.3 Agent Interaction Behavior 

Table 3 reports how each model distributes its 50-round budget across the two primary tools in our Spider-Agent setup: execute_sql for running queries against Snowflake, and 

bash for exploring database schemas and external knowledge files. 1st SQL and 1st Succ. 

denote the average round at which the model first calls execute_sql and first produces an error-free execution, respectively. Bash call counts are stable across models, ranging from 4.1 to 7.8, while SQL execution counts span a substantially wider range, from 4.4 for Gemini 3 Flash to 19.8 for DeepSeek V3.2. The gap in total rounds between proprietary and open-source models is therefore driven almost entirely by how many times each model executes SQL rather than how much it explores. Proprietary models average 4–6 SQL calls per instance and typically exhaust their budget at around 10 rounds; open-source models average 12–20 SQL calls over 19–30 rounds, with comparable bash usage. Open-source models also defer their first SQL attempt to around rounds 7–8, compared to rounds 5–6 for proprietary models, but this 2-round difference accounts for only a small fraction of the overall gap. The bulk of the difference accumulates after the first successful execution, suggesting that open-source models require substantially more iterative refinement to arrive at a correct result. Open-source models are also more likely to exhaust the 50-round budget without terminat-ing: MiniMax M2.5 reaches the limit on 10.8% of instances and GLM-5 on 6.2%, compared to at most 0.6% for any proprietary model. Beyond their tendency to consume more rounds, we observe that a fraction of these cases stem from malformed terminate tool calls, where the model repeatedly issues incorrectly formatted termination tool calls without recognizing the error, preventing the agent from signaling completion. 

4.4 Error Analysis 

To better understand model failures on S PIDER 2.0-AIF UNC , we conduct a stratified error analysis over a random sample of 85 instances drawn from three strata defined by which 9Preprint. 

Figure 3: Distribution of error types across three failure strata, based on manual analysis of randomly sampled instances. S1 : all three strong proprietary models fail; S2 : at least one strong proprietary model succeeds; S3 : all strong proprietary models succeed but at least one open-source model fails. Error categories: C1 schema grounding, C2 predicate & filter, 

C3 query logic, C4 AI function usage, C5 annotation issues (gold query ambiguity or errors; reported for S1 only). Instances may carry multiple error labels. models succeed. S1 (n = 30) contains instances where all three strong proprietary models (Claude Opus 4.6, Gemini 3.1 Pro, and GPT-5.4) fail. S2 (n = 30) contains instances where at least one strong proprietary model succeeds. S3 (n = 25) contains instances where all three strong proprietary models succeed but at least one open-source model fails. For each sampled instance, we manually identify the primary error type(s) from the predicted SQL of failing models, categorized into five types: C1 (schema grounding: wrong table, column, or prefix selection), C2 (predicate & filter: missing or incorrect filtering conditions), C3 

(query logic: incorrect aggregation granularity, join scope, or algorithmic errors), C4 (AI function usage: wrong function, incorrect syntax, missing or misspecified parameters), and C5 (annotation issues: ambiguous or incorrect gold queries). Instances may carry multiple error labels; full category definitions and representative examples are provided in Appendix C. Figure 3 summarizes the error distribution across the three strata. 

Universal failures are driven by predicate and schema errors. In S1, where all strong models fail, C2 (predicate & filter) and C1 (schema grounding) are the most prevalent error types, appearing in 47% and 57% of sampled instances respectively, often co-occurring. These errors reflect cases where the instruction does not fully specify filtering conditions or where the correct table and column names require precise knowledge of the database schema that all models lack. Notably, 7 of the 30 S1 instances (23%) show signs of annotation issues (C5), where the gold query encodes constraints absent from the instruction or admits multiple valid answers, suggesting that a non-trivial portion of universal failures may reflect benchmark limitations rather than model deficiencies. 

Aggregation and query logic errors distinguish strong models from weaker ones. In S2, where at least one strong model succeeds, C3 (query logic) is the dominant error type, appearing in 40% of instances. Failures in this stratum tend to involve subtle decisions such as when to apply filtering before or after an AI function call, how to handle nested aggregations, or how to correctly process semi-structured data types. These are errors that stronger models more reliably avoid, suggesting that C3 captures a meaningful dimension of model capability on AI-native SQL tasks. 

Open-source models show systematic weaknesses in schema grounding and AI function usage. In S3, where all strong proprietary models succeed but open-source models fail, C1 (schema grounding) and C4 (AI function usage) each appear in roughly 32% of instances, and C4 is nearly absent from S1 and S2. This indicates that non-standard AI function syntax and incorrect parameter specifications are disproportionately an open-source model failure mode, consistent with the function selection accuracy results in Appendix B.1. Schema grounding errors in S3 tend to involve subtler mistakes than in S1, such as selecting a table from the wrong schema family or misidentifying column aliases, which stronger models resolve through more thorough exploration of the database environment. 10 Preprint. 

# 5 Related Work 

The landscape of text-to-SQL evaluation has evolved from early datasets targeting domain generalization and lexico-logical alignments, such as KaggleDBQA (Lee et al., 2021) and SQUALL (Shi et al., 2020), to highly complex, enterprise-grade environments. Recent bench-marks like BEAVER (Chen et al., 2025) and Spider 2.0 (Lei et al., 2025) introduce extreme schema complexity and multi-step real-world workflows, while datasets like MultiSpider 2.0 (Pham et al., 2025) and CORGI (Li et al., 2026) extend these challenges to multilingual settings and predictive business logic. To navigate these increasingly massive schemas, researchers have developed sophisticated multi-agent reasoning frameworks, such as Re-FoRCE (Deng et al., 2025), AutoLink (Wang et al., 2025), DSR-SQL (Hao et al., 2025), and APEX-SQL (Cao et al., 2026), that use iterative schema linking and agentic exploration. How-ever, these evaluations and frameworks remain strictly confined to traditional relational algebra, overlooking a major shift in the database industry: the native integration of genera-tive AI capabilities into query execution engines. Systems like LOTUS (Patel et al., 2025) and MOAR (Wei et al., 2026) have introduced semantic operators as declarative primitives, and commercial platforms such as BigQuery (Google Cloud, 2026), Databricks (Databricks, 2026), and Snowflake Cortex (Snowflake, 2026) now allow users to execute large language model operations directly within SQL statements. Spider 2.0-AIFunc addresses this gap by providing the first benchmark specifically tailored to evaluate how effectively modern models and agents can generate these emerging AI-native SQL workflows. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We introduced Spider 2.0-AIFunc, a benchmark for evaluating text-to-SQL systems on AI-native SQL, in which target queries incorporate Snowflake Cortex AI functions alongside conventional relational operators. The benchmark comprises 465 verified instances across 125 real-world databases, constructed through an agent-based pipeline that rewrites existing enterprise text-to-SQL tasks into AI-native form and subjects every instance to a multi-round execution verification protocol before release. Evaluation of ten state-of-the-art language models shows a consistent capability gap between proprietary and open-source systems, with errors concentrated in schema grounding, predicate specification, query logic, and AI function parameterization. 

# 7 Limitations and Future Work 

Spider 2.0-AIFunc has several limitations. First, it is scoped to Snowflake and the six Cortex AI function types available at the time of construction, so it does not cover analogous functions on BigQuery, Databricks, or other platforms. Second, although our construction pipeline explicitly refines instructions to reduce ambiguity and make the intended AI-function usage clear, it is difficult to fully verify before release that every instance rules out all reasonable alternative interpretations. As in Spider 2.0, future submissions may reveal additional valid solutions or residual underspecification not captured by the current reference SQL and evaluation configuration; we view these submissions and issue reports as an important stress test for further refining the benchmark. Third, our construction pipeline uses a single strong construction model. Although each instance is derived from an existing Spider2-Snow task with a real database, schema, and reference SQL, this design may still introduce biases in wording style, rewrite patterns, or AI-function choices. Our evaluation is also limited by cost. We report a single agent trajectory per model and task, while repeated sampling with pass@k or variance estimates would provide a fuller picture of stochastic agent performance. Similarly, repeated gold-prediction execution with majority or stability-aware comparison could better capture AI-function output variability. Both directions would substantially increase model-inference cost and Snowflake AI-function execution cost, making them impractical for the current study. Looking ahead, future work should extend the construction pipeline to other platforms and function families, incorporate stronger human or multi-generator validation, and construct harder benchmarks that probe longer reasoning chains and more diverse AI-function compositions. 11 Preprint. 

# References 

Anthropic. Introducing claude opus 4.5. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-opus-4-5 , November 2025. Published Nov 24, 2025. Anthropic. Introducing claude opus 4.6. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-opus-4-6 , February 2026a. Published Feb 5, 2026. Anthropic. Introducing claude sonnet 4.6. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-sonnet-4-6 , February 2026b. Published Feb 17, 2026. Berk Atil, Sarp Aykent, Alexa Chittams, Lisheng Fu, Rebecca J. Passonneau, Evan Radcliffe, Guru Rajan Rajagopal, Adam Sloan, Tomasz Tudrej, Ferhan Ture, Zhe Wu, Lixinyu Xu, and Breck Baldwin. Non-determinism of "deterministic" llm settings, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.04667 .Bowen Cao, Weibin Liao, Yushi Sun, Dong Fang, Haitao Li, and Wai Lam. Apex-sql: Talking to the data via agentic exploration for text-to-sql, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2602.16720 .Peter Baile Chen, Fabian Wenz, Yi Zhang, Devin Yang, Justin Choi, Nesime Tatbul, Michael Cafarella, Ça ˘ gatay Demiralp, and Michael Stonebraker. Beaver: An enterprise benchmark for text-to-sql, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02038 .Databricks. Enrich data using ai functions. https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/ large-language-models/ai-functions , 2026. Accessed Apr 1, 2026. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenhao Xu, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Erhang Li, Fangqi Zhou, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Hanwei Xu, Hao Li, Haofen Liang, Haoran Wei, Haowei Zhang, Haowen Luo, Haozhe Ji, Honghui Ding, Hongxuan Tang, Huanqi Cao, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Zeng, Jialiang Huang, Jiashi Li, Jiaxin Xu, Jiewen Hu, Jingchang Chen, Jingting Xiang, Jingyang Yuan, Jingyuan Cheng, Jinhua Zhu, Jun Ran, Junguang Jiang, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kexing Zhou, Kezhao Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Wang, Liang Zhao, Liangsheng Yin, Lihua Guo, Lingxiao Luo, Linwang Ma, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, M. S. Di, M. Y Xu, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingxu Zhou, Panpan Huang, Peixin Cong, Peiyi Wang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qingyang Li, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiling Xu, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runqiu Yin, Runxin Xu, Ruomeng Shen, Ruoyu Zhang, S. H. Liu, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaofei Cai, Shaoyuan Chen, Shengding Hu, Shengyu Liu, Shiqiang Hu, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, Songyang Zhou, Tao Ni, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tian Ye, Tianyuan Yue, Wangding Zeng, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjie Pang, Wenjing Luo, Wenjun Gao, Wentao Zhang, Xi Gao, Xiangwen Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaotao Nie, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xingyou Li, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xu Chen, Xuecheng Su, Xuehai Pan, Xuheng Lin, Xuwei Fu, Y. Q. Wang, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanru Ma, Yao Li, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Wang, Yi Qian, Yi Yu, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Ding, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Ying Zhou, Yinmin Zhong, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixiao Chen, Yixuan Tan, Yixuan Wei, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yonglun Yang, Yongqiang Guo, Yongtong Wu, Yu Wu, Yuan Cheng, Yuan Ou, Yuanfan Xu, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuhan Wu, Yuheng Zou, Yukun Li, Yunfan Xiong, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehua Zhao, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao, Zhixian Huang, Zhiyu Wu, Zhuoshu Li, Zhuping Zhang, Zian Xu, Zihao Wang, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zilin Li, Zipeng Zhang, Ziwei Xie, Ziyi Gao, Zizheng Pan, Zongqing Yao, Bei Feng, Hui Li, J. L. Cai, Jiaqi Ni, Lei Xu, Meng Li, Ning Tian, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, S. S. Li, Shuang Zhou, Tianyu Sun, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaosha Chen, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou, Y. X. Zhu, 12 Preprint. Yanping Huang, Yaohui Li, Yi Zheng, Yuchen Zhu, Yunxian Ma, Zhen Huang, Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, Dongjie Ji, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jin Chen, Leyi Xia, Miaojun Wang, Mingming Li, Peng Zhang, Ruyi Chen, Shangmian Sun, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, T. Wang, W. L. Xiao, Wei An, Xianzu Wang, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Ying Tang, Yukun Zha, Zekai Zhang, Zhe Ju, Zhen Zhang, and Zihua Qu. Deepseek-v3.2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02556 .Minghang Deng, Ashwin Ramachandran, Canwen Xu, Lanxiang Hu, Zhewei Yao, Anupam Datta, and Hao Zhang. Reforce: A text-to-sql agent with self-refinement, consensus enforcement, and column exploration, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00675 .GLM-5-Team, :, Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Zhenyu Hou, Zhengxiao Du, Qinkai Zheng, Bin Chen, Da Yin, Chendi Ge, Chenghua Huang, Chengxing Xie, Chenzheng Zhu, Congfeng Yin, Cunxiang Wang, Gengzheng Pan, Hao Zeng, Haoke Zhang, Haoran Wang, Huilong Chen, Jiajie Zhang, Jian Jiao, Jiaqi Guo, Jingsen Wang, Jingzhao Du, Jinzhu Wu, Kedong Wang, Lei Li, Lin Fan, Lucen Zhong, Mingdao Liu, Mingming Zhao, Pengfan Du, Qian Dong, Rui Lu, Shuang-Li, Shulin Cao, Song Liu, Ting Jiang, Xiaodong Chen, Xiaohan Zhang, Xuancheng Huang, Xuezhen Dong, Yabo Xu, Yao Wei, Yifan An, Yilin Niu, Yitong Zhu, Yuanhao Wen, Yukuo Cen, Yushi Bai, Zhongpei Qiao, Zihan Wang, Zikang Wang, Zilin Zhu, Ziqiang Liu, Zixuan Li, Bojie Wang, Bosi Wen, Can Huang, Changpeng Cai, Chao Yu, Chen Li, Chengwei Hu, Chenhui Zhang, Dan Zhang, Daoyan Lin, Dayong Yang, Di Wang, Ding Ai, Erle Zhu, Fangzhou Yi, Feiyu Chen, Guohong Wen, Hailong Sun, Haisha Zhao, Haiyi Hu, Hanchen Zhang, Hanrui Liu, Hanyu Zhang, Hao Peng, Hao Tai, Haobo Zhang, He Liu, Hongwei Wang, Hongxi Yan, Hongyu Ge, Huan Liu, Huanpeng Chu, Jia’ni Zhao, Jiachen Wang, Jiajing Zhao, Jiamin Ren, Jiapeng Wang, Jiaxin Zhang, Jiayi Gui, Jiayue Zhao, Jijie Li, Jing An, Jing Li, Jingwei Yuan, Jinhua Du, Jinxin Liu, Junkai Zhi, Junwen Duan, Kaiyue Zhou, Kangjian Wei, Ke Wang, Keyun Luo, Laiqiang Zhang, Leigang Sha, Liang Xu, Lindong Wu, Lintao Ding, Lu Chen, Minghao Li, Nianyi Lin, Pan Ta, Qiang Zou, Rongjun Song, Ruiqi Yang, Shangqing Tu, Shangtong Yang, Shaoxiang Wu, Shengyan Zhang, Shijie Li, Shuang Li, Shuyi Fan, Wei Qin, Wei Tian, Weining Zhang, Wenbo Yu, Wenjie Liang, Xiang Kuang, Xiangmeng Cheng, Xiangyang Li, Xiaoquan Yan, Xiaowei Hu, Xiaoying Ling, Xing Fan, Xingye Xia, Xinyuan Zhang, Xinze Zhang, Xirui Pan, Xu Zou, Xunkai Zhang, Yadi Liu, Yandong Wu, Yanfu Li, Yidong Wang, Yifan Zhu, Yijun Tan, Yilin Zhou, Yiming Pan, Ying Zhang, Yinpei Su, Yipeng Geng, Yong Yan, Yonglin Tan, Yuean Bi, Yuhan Shen, Yuhao Yang, Yujiang Li, Yunan Liu, Yunqing Wang, Yuntao Li, Yurong Wu, Yutao Zhang, Yuxi Duan, Yuxuan Zhang, Zezhen Liu, Zhengtao Jiang, Zhenhe Yan, Zheyu Zhang, Zhixiang Wei, Zhuo Chen, Zhuoer Feng, Zijun Yao, Ziwei Chai, Ziyuan Wang, Zuzhou Zhang, Bin Xu, Minlie Huang, Hongning Wang, Juanzi Li, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Glm-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15763 .Google. Gemini 3 flash: frontier intelligence built for speed. https://blog.google/ products-and-platforms/products/gemini/gemini-3-flash/ , December 2025. Pub-lished Dec 17, 2025. Google. Gemini 3.1 pro: A smarter model for your most complex tasks. https://blog. google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/gemini-models/gemini-3-1-pro/ ,February 2026. Published Feb 19, 2026. Google Cloud. Introduction to ai in bigquery. https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/ docs/ai-introduction , 2026. Accessed Apr 1, 2026. Zhifeng Hao, Qibin Song, Ruichu Cai, and Boyan Xu. Text-to-sql as dual-state reasoning: Integrating adaptive context and progressive generation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2511.21402 .Horace He and Thinking Machines Lab. Defeating nondeterminism in llm infer-ence. Thinking Machines Lab: Connectionism , 2025. doi: 10.64434/tml.20250910. https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/defeating-nondeterminism-in-llm-inference/. Chia-Hsuan Lee, Oleksandr Polozov, and Matthew Richardson. Kaggledbqa: Realistic evaluation of text-to-sql parsers, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11455 .13 Preprint. Fangyu Lei, Jixuan Chen, Yuxiao Ye, Ruisheng Cao, Dongchan Shin, Hongjin Su, Zhaoqing Suo, Hongcheng Gao, Wenjing Hu, Pengcheng Yin, Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, Ruoxi Sun, Qian Liu, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. Spider 2.0: Evaluating language models on real-world enterprise text-to-sql workflows, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07763 .Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Rongyu Cao, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, Xuanhe Zhou, Chenhao Ma, Guoliang Li, Kevin C. C. Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng, and Yongbin Li. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls, 2023. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03111 .Yue Li, Ran Tao, Derek Hommel, Yusuf Denizay Dönder, Sungyong Chang, David Mimno, and Unso Eun Seo Jo. Agent bain vs. agent mckinsey: A new text-to-sql benchmark for the business domain, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.07309 .Xinyu Liu, Shuyu Shen, Boyan Li, Peixian Ma, Runzhi Jiang, Yuxin Zhang, Ju Fan, Guoliang Li, Nan Tang, and Yuyu Luo. A survey of text-to-sql in the era of llms: Where are we, and where are we going?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.05109 .MiniMax. Minimax m2.5: Built for real-world productivity. https://www.minimax.io/news/ minimax-m25 , February 2026. Published Feb 11, 2026. OpenAI. Introducing gpt-5.4. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-4/ , March 2026. Published Mar 18, 2026. Shuyin Ouyang, Jie M. Zhang, Mark Harman, and Meng Wang. An empirical study of the non-determinism of ChatGPT in code generation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 34(2):1–28, January 2025. ISSN 1557-7392. doi: 10.1145/ 3697010. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3697010 .Liana Patel, Siddharth Jha, Melissa Pan, Harshit Gupta, Parth Asawa, Carlos Guestrin, and Matei Zaharia. Semantic operators: A declarative model for rich, ai-based data processing, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11418 .Khanh Trinh Pham, Thu Huong Nguyen, Jun Jo, Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen, and Thanh Tam Nguyen. Multilingual text-to-sql: Benchmarking the limits of language models with collaborative language agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.24405 .Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents. https://qwen.ai/blog?id= qwen3.5 , February 2026. Published Feb 27, 2026. Tianze Shi, Chen Zhao, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Hal Daumé III, and Lillian Lee. On the potential of lexico-logical alignments for semantic parsing to sql queries, 2020. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11246 .Snowflake. Snowflake cortex ai functions (including llm functions). https://docs. snowflake.com/en/user-guide/snowflake-cortex/aisql , 2026. Accessed Apr 1, 2026. Kimi Team, Tongtong Bai, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, S. H. Cai, Yuan Cao, Y. Charles, H. S. Che, Cheng Chen, Guanduo Chen, Huarong Chen, Jia Chen, Jiahao Chen, Jianlong Chen, Jun Chen, Kefan Chen, Liang Chen, Ruijue Chen, Xinhao Chen, Yanru Chen, Yanxu Chen, Yicun Chen, Yimin Chen, Yingjiang Chen, Yuankun Chen, Yujie Chen, Yutian Chen, Zhirong Chen, Ziwei Chen, Dazhi Cheng, Minghan Chu, Jialei Cui, Jiaqi Deng, Muxi Diao, Hao Ding, Mengfan Dong, Mengnan Dong, Yuxin Dong, Yuhao Dong, Angang Du, Chenzhuang Du, Dikang Du, Lingxiao Du, Yulun Du, Yu Fan, Shengjun Fang, Qiulin Feng, Yichen Feng, Garimugai Fu, Kelin Fu, Hongcheng Gao, Tong Gao, Yuyao Ge, Shangyi Geng, Chengyang Gong, Xiaochen Gong, Zhuoma Gongque, Qizheng Gu, Xinran Gu, Yicheng Gu, Longyu Guan, Yuanying Guo, Xiaoru Hao, Weiran He, Wenyang He, Yunjia He, Chao Hong, Hao Hu, Jiaxi Hu, Yangyang Hu, Zhenxing Hu, Ke Huang, Ruiyuan Huang, Weixiao Huang, Zhiqi Huang, Tao Jiang, Zhejun Jiang, Xinyi Jin, Yu Jing, Guokun Lai, Aidi Li, C. Li, Cheng Li, Fang Li, Guanghe Li, Guanyu Li, Haitao Li, Haoyang Li, Jia Li, Jingwei Li, Junxiong Li, Lincan Li, Mo Li, Weihong Li, Wentao Li, 14 Preprint. Xinhang Li, Xinhao Li, Yang Li, Yanhao Li, Yiwei Li, Yuxiao Li, Zhaowei Li, Zheming Li, Weilong Liao, Jiawei Lin, Xiaohan Lin, Zhishan Lin, Zichao Lin, Cheng Liu, Chenyu Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Liang Liu, Shaowei Liu, Shudong Liu, Shuran Liu, Tianwei Liu, Tianyu Liu, Weizhou Liu, Xiangyan Liu, Yangyang Liu, Yanming Liu, Yibo Liu, Yuanxin Liu, Yue Liu, Zhengying Liu, Zhongnuo Liu, Enzhe Lu, Haoyu Lu, Zhiyuan Lu, Junyu Luo, Tongxu Luo, Yashuo Luo, Long Ma, Yingwei Ma, Shaoguang Mao, Yuan Mei, Xin Men, Fanqing Meng, Zhiyong Meng, Yibo Miao, Minqing Ni, Kun Ouyang, Siyuan Pan, Bo Pang, Yuchao Qian, Ruoyu Qin, Zeyu Qin, Jiezhong Qiu, Bowen Qu, Zeyu Shang, Youbo Shao, Tianxiao Shen, Zhennan Shen, Juanfeng Shi, Lidong Shi, Shengyuan Shi, Feifan Song, Pengwei Song, Tianhui Song, Xiaoxi Song, Hongjin Su, Jianlin Su, Zhaochen Su, Lin Sui, Jinsong Sun, Junyao Sun, Tongyu Sun, Flood Sung, Yunpeng Tai, Chuning Tang, Heyi Tang, Xiaojuan Tang, Zhengyang Tang, Jiawen Tao, Shiyuan Teng, Chaoran Tian, Pengfei Tian, Ao Wang, Bowen Wang, Chensi Wang, Chuang Wang, Congcong Wang, Dingkun Wang, Dinglu Wang, Dongliang Wang, Feng Wang, Hailong Wang, Haiming Wang, Hengzhi Wang, Huaqing Wang, Hui Wang, Jiahao Wang, Jinhong Wang, Jiuzheng Wang, Kaixin Wang, Linian Wang, Qibin Wang, Shengjie Wang, Shuyi Wang, Si Wang, Wei Wang, Xiaochen Wang, Xinyuan Wang, Yao Wang, Yejie Wang, Yipu Wang, Yiqin Wang, Yucheng Wang, Yuzhi Wang, Zhaoji Wang, Zhaowei Wang, Zhengtao Wang, Zhexu Wang, Zihan Wang, Zizhe Wang, Chu Wei, Ming Wei, Chuan Wen, Zichen Wen, Chengjie Wu, Haoning Wu, Junyan Wu, Rucong Wu, Wenhao Wu, Yuefeng Wu, Yuhao Wu, Yuxin Wu, Zijian Wu, Chenjun Xiao, Jin Xie, Xiaotong Xie, Yuchong Xie, Yifei Xin, Bowei Xing, Boyu Xu, Jianfan Xu, Jing Xu, Jinjing Xu, L. H. Xu, Lin Xu, Suting Xu, Weixin Xu, Xinbo Xu, Xinran Xu, Yangchuan Xu, Yichang Xu, Yuemeng Xu, Zelai Xu, Ziyao Xu, Junjie Yan, Yuzi Yan, Guangyao Yang, Hao Yang, Junwei Yang, Kai Yang, Ningyuan Yang, Ruihan Yang, Xiaofei Yang, Xinlong Yang, Ying Yang, Yi Yang, Yi Yang, Zhen Yang, Zhilin Yang, Zonghan Yang, Haotian Yao, Dan Ye, Wenjie Ye, Zhuorui Ye, Bohong Yin, Chengzhen Yu, Longhui Yu, Tao Yu, Tianxiang Yu, Enming Yuan, Mengjie Yuan, Xiaokun Yuan, Yang Yue, Weihao Zeng, Dunyuan Zha, Haobing Zhan, Dehao Zhang, Hao Zhang, Jin Zhang, Puqi Zhang, Qiao Zhang, Rui Zhang, Xiaobin Zhang, Y. Zhang, Yadong Zhang, Yangkun Zhang, Yichi Zhang, Yizhi Zhang, Yongting Zhang, Yu Zhang, Yushun Zhang, Yutao Zhang, Yutong Zhang, Zheng Zhang, Chenguang Zhao, Feifan Zhao, Jinxiang Zhao, Shuai Zhao, Xiangyu Zhao, Yikai Zhao, Zijia Zhao, Huabin Zheng, Ruihan Zheng, Shaojie Zheng, Tengyang Zheng, Junfeng Zhong, Longguang Zhong, Weiming Zhong, M. Zhou, Runjie Zhou, Xinyu Zhou, Zaida Zhou, Jinguo Zhu, Liya Zhu, Xinhao Zhu, Yuxuan Zhu, Zhen Zhu, Jingze Zhuang, Weiyu Zhuang, Ying Zou, and Xinxing Zu. Kimi k2.5: Visual agentic intelligence, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02276 .Ziyang Wang, Yuanlei Zheng, Zhenbiao Cao, Xiaojin Zhang, Zhongyu Wei, Pei Fu, Zhenbo Luo, Wei Chen, and Xiang Bai. Autolink: Autonomous schema exploration and expansion for scalable schema linking in text-to-sql at scale, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2511.17190 .Lindsey Linxi Wei, Shreya Shankar, Sepanta Zeighami, Yeounoh Chung, Fatma Ozcan, and Aditya G. Parameswaran. Multi-objective agentic rewrites for unstructured data processing, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02289 .Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.08887 .Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries from natural language using reinforcement learning, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1709.00103 .15 Preprint. 

# Appendix A Model-Specific Evaluation Adjustments for GPT-5.4 

GPT-5.4 exhibited two model-specific output patterns during evaluation, which is why its result in Table 1 is marked with † and accompanied by the ablation below. 

HTML entity encoding. Because our agent framework uses XML tags for tool calls, GPT-5.4 frequently encoded SQL operators as HTML entities (e.g., &gt; , &lt; , &amp; ) rather than their literal characters. This occurred in 184 of 465 instances, producing a total of 672 such entities, and caused direct SQL compilation failures. No other model exhibited this behavior. We applied automatic unescaping of HTML entities prior to SQL execution uniformly across all runs reported in this paper. 

Parameter optimization. Despite instructions explicitly stating to strictly follow AI function parameters as specified, GPT-5.4 consistently attempted to rephrase or optimize prompt text, category labels, and condition strings in AI function calls. Since evaluation requires exact semantic alignment with the gold query, such modifications cause evaluation failure. To address this, we applied an additional patch to the system prompt:    

> IMPORTANT: You MUST use the AI function parameters (category labels, prompt text, condition strings, etc.) EXACTLY as specified in the instruction. Any attempt to “improve”, rephrase, expand, or optimize these parameters will cause evaluation failure.

Table 4 reports execution accuracy across all combinations of patch status and reasoning effort setting. The patch consistently improves accuracy by approximately 10 percentage points regardless of reasoning effort level. We additionally conducted an ablation study over reasoning effort settings ( medium , high ,

xhigh ). Contrary to expectations, increasing reasoning effort yields no consistent improve-ment in either the patched or unpatched setting, suggesting that higher reasoning effort does not benefit AI-native SQL generation for GPT-5.4 on this benchmark. We report the patched medium result (63.0%) in Table 1, and include the full ablation here to make the effect of the adjustment explicit. Table 4: GPT-5.4 execution accuracy under different reasoning effort settings, with and without the parameter optimization patch. HTML entity unescaping is applied uniformly across all runs. ∆ denotes the improvement from applying the patch. The result reported in Table 1 is bolded .

EX (%) Reasoning effort w/o patch w/ patch ∆ (pp) 

medium 52.9 63.0 +10.1 

high 51.2 62.2 +11.0 

xhigh 51.4 61.9 +10.5 

# B Detailed Analysis 

B.1 AI Function Selection Accuracy 

Beyond execution accuracy, we measure whether models select the correct set of AI functions for each task, defined as an exact match between the predicted and gold function sets: FSA = |{ i : funcs ( ˆSi) = funcs (Si)}| 

N (3) 16 Preprint. where funcs (S) denotes the set of AI function types invoked in query S. Table 5 reports function selection accuracy across all ten models. Table 5: AI function selection accuracy (FSA): proportion of instances where the predicted query invokes exactly the same set of AI function types as the gold query. 

Model FSA (%) 

> PROPRIETARY

Claude Opus 4.6 99.6 

Claude Sonnet 4.6 98.9 

Gemini 3.1 Pro 99.6 

GPT-5.4 98.3 

Gemini 3 Flash 98.9 

> OPEN-SOURCE

Kimi K2.5 96.6 

DeepSeek V3.2 97.0 

GLM-5 94.6 

Qwen 3.5 Plus 89.9 

MiniMax M2.5 68.6 Function selection accuracy is high across most models, with all proprietary models exceeding 98% and most open-source models above 94%. This is consistent with the design of our bench-mark: because task instructions explicitly spec-ify AI function parameters in detail, the intended function usage is usually clear, making function selection a relatively tractable component of the task. Proprietary models are the most consistent in this regard. Among open-source models, most achieve similarly high selection accuracy, with one notable exception: MiniMax M2.5 achieves only 68.6%, with a substantial portion of its errors at-tributable to instances where the model failed to invoke the expected AI functions entirely. This largely explains its lower overall EX score relative to other open-source models. 

B.2 Per-Function-Type Breakdown 

Table 6 reports execution accuracy broken down by AI function type across all ten models. Each instance may involve more than one function type, so a single instance can contribute to multi-ple columns. Across all models, tasks involving 

AI_CLASSIFY , AI_FILTER , and AI_SIMILARITY are solved at consistently higher rates than those in-volving AI_AGG and AI_EXTRACT , suggesting that aggregation and structured extraction pose greater challenges regardless of overall model capability. AI_SENTIMENT shows the highest variance across models, which we attribute in part to the small number of instances (22) in this category. Table 6: Execution accuracy (%) by AI function type. Instance counts per function: 

AI_CLASSIFY (n = 259), AI_FILTER (n = 163), AI_SIMILARITY (n = 159), AI_AGG (n = 117), 

AI_EXTRACT (n = 51), AI_SENTIMENT (n = 22). Since instances may involve multiple func-tions, counts do not sum to 465.                                                                   

> Model AI_CLASS. AI_FILTER AI_SIMIL. AI_AGG AI_EXTR. AI_SENT.
> PROPRIETARY
> Claude Opus 4.6 77.6 76.1 74.2 60.7 60.8 54.5
> Claude Sonnet 4.6 73.7 75.5 73.0 57.3 58.8 59.1
> Gemini 3.1 Pro 71.8 68.1 73.0 59.0 60.8 50.0
> GPT-5.4 66.8 67.5 67.9 53.0 58.8 36.4
> Gemini 3 Flash 64.1 66.9 64.2 51.3 47.1 59.1
> OPEN-SOURCE
> Kimi K2.5 59.1 62.0 56.0 57.3 52.9 40.9
> Qwen 3.5 Plus 57.9 63.2 56.6 47.9 52.9 68.2
> DeepSeek V3.2 58.3 58.9 56.6 45.3 45.1 40.9
> GLM-5 58.3 60.7 58.5 35.9 43.1 36.4
> MiniMax M2.5 45.9 44.2 55.3 37.6 37.3 36.4

17 Preprint. 

B.3 Single-Function vs. Multi-Function Tasks 

Table 7 breaks down execution accuracy by the number of AI functions involved in each task. We group instances with two or more functions together ( n = 310). Across 9 of 10 models, accuracy on multi-function tasks is higher than on single-function tasks. This pattern is consistent with the function-type distribution: multi-function tasks are disproportionately composed of AI_CLASSIFY , AI_FILTER , and AI_SIMILARITY combinations, which are the function types that models solve most reliably, as shown in Table 6. Table 7: Execution accuracy (%) on single-function ( n = 155) versus multi-function ( n = 310) tasks. ∆ denotes the difference in percentage points (multi minus single).                                   

> Model Single Multi ∆(pp)
> PROPRIETARY
> Claude Opus 4.6 61.3 74.8 +13.5
> Claude Sonnet 4.6 63.9 71.6 +7.7
> Gemini 3.1 Pro 63.2 69.0 +5.8
> GPT-5.4 60.0 64.5 +4.5
> Gemini 3 Flash 57.4 62.6 +5.2
> OPEN-SOURCE
> Kimi K2.5 59.4 57.4 −1.9
> Qwen 3.5 Plus 56.1 57.4 +1.3
> DeepSeek V3.2 54.2 54.8 +0.6
> GLM-5 47.1 55.8 +8.7
> MiniMax M2.5 42.6 46.1 +3.5

B.4 Execution Time Analysis 

We analyze the execution time of predicted SQL queries relative to their corresponding gold queries. For each correctly solved instance, we compute the time ratio r = tpred /tgold ,where tpred and tgold denote the execution times of the predicted and gold SQL queries respectively, both measured within the same evaluation window. A ratio below 1.0 indicates that the predicted query runs faster than the gold query; a ratio above 1.0 indicates it runs slower. We report the mean ratio, and the proportion of instances where the predicted query is faster than the gold ( % Faster ). We note that execution time on cloud data warehouses is subject to considerable variance due to factors such as cluster load and caching, and these results should therefore be interpreted as indicative rather than definitive. Tables 8 (a) and (b) report results on two subsets: all correctly solved instances per model, and the 73 instances solved correctly by all ten models, which provides a controlled compar-ison across models on identical tasks. Across all models, mean ratios consistently exceed 1.0, indicating that predicted queries tend to run slower than gold queries on average. This is expected: gold queries are hand-crafted and often optimized, while model-generated queries may introduce redundant subqueries, unnecessary joins, or less efficient AI function usage. Despite this, the median ratio across most models remains close to 1.0, and roughly half of predicted queries run faster than the gold, suggesting that the overhead is not uniform and that models occasionally find more efficient solutions. On the controlled subset of 73 instances solved by all models, Claude Sonnet 4.6 achieves the only mean ratio below 1.0 (0.950), while open-source models tend toward higher mean ratios, though the small subset size limits the strength of this conclusion. 18 Preprint. Table 8: Execution time analysis. Time ratio r = tpred /tgold measures predicted query execution time relative to the gold query; r < 1 indicates the predicted query runs faster. %Faster is the proportion of instances where r < 1. Execution times are subject to warehouse-level variance and should be interpreted as indicative. 

(a) All correctly solved instances per model. 

Model N Mean r % Faster 

> PROPRIETARY

Opus 4.6 327 1.476 53.2 

Sonnet 4.6 321 1.373 52.6 

Gemini 3.1 Pro 312 1.611 61.9 

GPT-5.4 293 1.735 58.7 

Gemini 3 Flash 283 1.674 56.5 

> OPEN-SOURCE

Kimi K2.5 270 1.485 50.7 

Qwen 3.5 Plus 265 1.466 55.1 

DeepSeek V3.2 254 1.413 51.2 

GLM-5 246 1.818 52.4 

MiniMax M2.5 209 1.536 61.7 

(b) Instances (73) solved correctly by all models. 

Model Mean r % Faster 

> PROPRIETARY

Opus 4.6 1.169 52.1 

Sonnet 4.6 0.950 61.6 

Gemini 3.1 Pro 1.898 60.3 

GPT-5.4 1.517 54.8 

Gemini 3 Flash 2.123 50.7 

> OPEN-SOURCE

Kimi K2.5 2.206 43.8 

Qwen 3.5 Plus 1.755 54.8 

DeepSeek V3.2 1.898 41.1 

GLM-5 2.011 53.4 

MiniMax M2.5 2.318 56.2 

# C Error Taxonomy 

We define five error categories for the stratified error analysis in §4.4. A single instance may be assigned multiple categories if the predicted SQL exhibits more than one type of error. 

C1 Schema grounding. The model selects the wrong table, column, or table prefix. This includes cases where a correct table family is identified but the specific table variant is wrong (e.g., selecting a table without a required schema prefix), as well as cases where column names do not match the schema exactly. 

C2 Predicate & filter. The model omits a required filtering condition or applies an incorrect one. This includes missing WHERE clauses, incorrect comparison values, and condi-tions that are logically present but semantically wrong (e.g., filtering on the wrong column or using an incorrect constant). 

C3 Query logic. The model produces incorrect aggregation granularity, join scope, or algorithmic logic. This includes grouping at the wrong level, joining too many or too few tables, incorrect handling of semi-structured data types, and algorithmic errors such as double-counting or incorrect unit conversion. 

C4 AI function usage. The model misuses an AI function, including invoking the wrong function type, using non-standard or unsupported syntax, omitting a required AI function call entirely, or specifying incorrect parameters such as wrong label formats or malformed extraction schemas. This category is specific to AI-native SQL and has no direct analogue in traditional text-to-SQL benchmarks. 

C5 Annotation issues. The gold query encodes constraints not mentioned in the instruction, or the task admits multiple valid SQL queries that produce different but arguably correct results. This category is only assigned in S1, where all strong models fail, and reflects potential benchmark limitations rather than model errors. 19 Preprint. 

# D Sampled Prompt for Snowflake AI Function Reference 

AI Function Reference Documentation R

<ai_sql_function_reference> You MUST use the exact function signatures and syntax below. These are the supported Snowflake Cortex AI SQL functions. Do NOT use deprecated syntax (like SNOWFLAKE.CORTEX.* prefix). ---### AI_CLASSIFY **Syntax**: `AI_CLASSIFY(<input>, <labels> [, <config_object>]) `

Categorizes text into a set of labels you provide. **Parameters** - `input `: Text string to classify. - `labels `: Array of category strings OR objects with optional descriptions: - Simple: `['sports ', 'finance ', 'technology ']`

- With descriptions (max 25 words each): `[{ 'label ': 'urgent ', 'description ':

'requires immediate response '}, { 'label ': 'normal '}] `

- `config_object ` (Optional): - `output_mode `: `'multi '` for multi-label (default: `'single '`)- `task_description `: Brief task explanation (50 words max) **Returns**: JSON object `{"labels": ["best_match"]} `. Multi-label: `{"labels": ["match_1", "match_2"]} `.**Example** 

``` sql SELECT AI_CLASSIFY( 'My internet is not working ', [ 'technical_issue ', 'billing ',

'general_inquiry ']); -- Returns: {"labels": ["technical_issue"]} -- Multi-label with config SELECT AI_CLASSIFY( 'I love traveling and cooking. ', [ 'travel ', 'cooking ', 'gaming '], {'output_mode ': 'multi '}); -- Returns: {"labels": ["travel", "cooking"]} 

``` 

---### AI_SENTIMENT **Syntax**: `AI_SENTIMENT(<text> [, <categories>]) `

Evaluates the emotional tone of text, optionally broken down by specific aspects. **Parameters** - `text `: Text string to analyze. - `categories ` (Optional): Array of aspect strings (max 10, each up to 30 chars). If omitted, only overall sentiment is returned. **Returns**: JSON with `"categories" ` array. Each entry has `name ` and `sentiment `

(one of: `positive `, `negative `, `neutral `, `mixed `, `unknown `). Always includes 

`"overall" `.**Example** 

``` sql SELECT AI_SENTIMENT( 'The pizza was great! '); -- Returns: {"categories": [{"name": "overall", "sentiment": "positive"}]} 

20 Preprint. 

SELECT AI_SENTIMENT( 'The pizza was great but the delivery was late. ', [ 'Food ',

'Delivery ']); -- Returns: {"categories": [{"name": "overall", "sentiment": "mixed"}, {"name": "Food", "sentiment": "positive"}, {"name": "Delivery", "sentiment": "negative"}]} 

``` 

---### AI_EXTRACT **Syntax**: `AI_EXTRACT(<text>, <responseFormat>) `

Extracts structured facts from unstructured text. Use named parameters: `text => 

'... '`, `responseFormat => ... `.**Parameters** - `text `: Text to extract from (named parameter required). - `responseFormat `: Defines extraction schema: - Object format: `{'name ': 'What is the person name? ', 'city ': 'What is the city? '}`

- Array format: `['What is the first name? ', 'Where does the person live? ']`

- Supports questions or descriptions as values. - Limits: max 100 questions, max 512 tokens per answer. **Returns**: `{"error": null, "response": {"field1": "value1", "field2": "value2"}} `

(object format) or `{"error": null, "response": ["val1", "val2"]} ` (array format). **Example** 

``` sql SELECT AI_EXTRACT( text => 'John Doe lives in New York and works for Snowflake. ',responseFormat => { 'name ': 'What is the person name? ', 'city ': 'What is the city? ', 'company ': 'What company does the person work for? '}); -- Returns: {"error": null, "response": {"name": "John Doe", "city": "New York", "company": "Snowflake"}} 

``` 

---### AI_FILTER **Syntax**: `AI_FILTER(<input>) `

Returns TRUE or FALSE based on whether the input meets a natural language condition. Best used in WHERE clauses. **Parameters** - `input `: Natural language statement. Can be: - String constant: `AI_FILTER( 'Is Canada in North America? ')`

- With CONCAT: `CONCAT( 'The customer is satisfied: ', review_text) `

- With PROMPT: `PROMPT( 'The reviewer enjoyed the restaurant: {0} ', review_text) `

- Tip: Use detailed conditions, not vague words. Avoid NULL column values. **Returns**: `BOOLEAN ` (TRUE or FALSE). **Example** 

``` sql SELECT * FROM reviews WHERE AI_FILTER(PROMPT( 'The reviewer enjoyed the restaurant: {0} ', review_text)); SELECT country, region FROM countries CROSS JOIN regions WHERE AI_FILTER(PROMPT( '{0} is in {1} ', country, region)); 

``` 

21 Preprint. 

---### AI_SIMILARITY **Syntax**: `AI_SIMILARITY(<input1>, <input2>) `

Calculates semantic similarity between two texts using vector embeddings. Measures conceptual closeness, not keyword overlap. **Parameters** - `input1 `: Text string to compare. - `input2 `: Text string to compare against. **Returns**: `FLOAT ` between -1.0 and 1.0 (1.0 = highly similar). **Example** 

``` sql SELECT review_text, AI_SIMILARITY(review_text, 'The battery drains too fast ') AS score FROM product_reviews ORDER BY score DESC LIMIT 3; 

``` 

---### AI_AGG **Syntax**: `AI_AGG(<expr>, <instruction>) `

Aggregate function that processes grouped text rows into a single summary or analysis. Supports datasets larger than the model 's context window. **Parameters** - `expr `: Text column or expression (can use `CONCAT() ` or `|| ` to combine columns). - `instruction `: Natural language string specifying how to aggregate. - Tips: Use declarative statements, describe the data and use case. **Returns**: Single string per group. **Example** 

``` sql SELECT product_id, AI_AGG(review_text, 'Summarize the product reviews for potential consumers ') AS summary FROM reviews GROUP BY product_id; -- Combining multiple columns SELECT restaurant_id, AI_AGG( 

'Menu Item: ' || menu_item || ', Review: ' || review_text, 

'Summarize the restaurant reviews, highlighting menu items mentioned '

) AS summary FROM restaurant_reviews GROUP BY restaurant_id; 

``` 

---To ensure your final SQL query produces correct, testable results: - Some AI functions return JSON objects. When these appear in your final output columns, always extract the scalar value using Snowflake JSON accessor syntax (e.g., 

`:labels[0]::STRING `). Raw JSON objects in output columns will not pass evaluation. 

22 Preprint. 

- Strictly follow the parameters specified in the instruction. Do not add, assume, or invent parameters that are not explicitly requested — any deviation from the instruction 's specifications will cause test failures. </ai_sql_function_reference> 

23