Title: RPAM: A Principled Metric for Evaluating Associations in Language Models with High Predictive Validity in Downstream Outputs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.05679v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Jul 2026 00:16:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# RPAM: A Principled Metric for Evaluating Associations in Language Models with High Predictive Validity in Downstream Outputs 

## Damian Hodel 1, Jevin West 1, Aylin Caliskan 1,

> 1

## University of Washington, Seattle, USA 

## {hodeld, jevinw, aylin }@uw.edu 

Abstract 

Language models (LMs) exhibit problematic biases, such as stereotypes. Effectively analyzing and mitigating such bi-ases requires accurate and generalizable evaluation meth-ods of the underlying associations. Some existing approaches focus on downstream metrics that analyze associations in generated text. Since generated text content can vary dras-tically across LMs, such metrics often require specialized evaluation datasets, which limits the generalization of such downstream metrics. In contrast, upstream metrics examine LMs at the fundamental level of embeddings or continuation probabilities, enabling principled association analyses across LMs. Yet, to date, no upstream metric for generative LMs has uncovered a strong relationship with real-world associ-ations, including those measured in generated text. To ad-dress this gap, we introduce the Relative Probability Asso-ciation Metric (RPAM), an association evaluation metric for generative LMs. For three LMs of different quality of lan-guage generation and purpose (Mistral-7B-Instruct, Mistral-7B, and GPT-2) and well-studied evaluation datasets (WEAT-WS, Bellezza, WS-353, and SST2), we find a strong rela-tionship between upstream RPAM measurements and corre-sponding implicit and explicit associations observed in hu-mans, as well as biases measured downstream with LM-specific tasks, outperforming prior record values where ap-plicable. 

## 1 Introduction 

Generative language models (LMs) such as chatbots ex-hibit associations between concepts, for example, between women and arts. While necessary in language, associations can be harmful for example, when LMs generate texts in-volving stereotypes and negative attitudes towards specific social groups (Ghosh and Caliskan 2023), or when systems built on these LMs are used for automated decisions in high-stakes settings such as healthcare (Apell and Eriksson 2023), and content moderation (Boicel 2024). In social contexts, such problematic associations are often referred to as social biases (Bender et al. 2021; An et al. 2023; Rudinger et al. 2018; Hofmann et al. 2024). Effective strategies to mitigate these risks of harm, such as artificial intelligence regulations, require accurate and gen-eralizable association measurement methods, typically con-sisting of an evaluation metric and a dataset fed to the LM (Gallegos et al. 2024). For generative LMs, existing ap-proaches tend to focus on downstream metrics that aim to measure associations directly in LMs’ generated text (e.g. Kotek, Dockum, and Sun 2023; Wan et al. 2023; Dhamala et al. 2021). Since the quality of language generation de-pends on a LM’s type (e.g. architecture, size, fine-tuning purpose, etc., illustrated in Figure 4 in the appendix), down-stream metrics often rely on specialized evaluation datasets for specific concepts and LMs, which limits the generaliza-tion of downstream metrics (Gallegos et al. 2024). In contrast, the majority of upstream metrics examine LMs at the fundamental level of embeddings (Wolfe and Caliskan 2022; May et al. 2019; Tan and Celis 2019) or con-tinuation probabilities 1 (Nadeem, Bethke, and Reddy 2021; Kurita et al. 2019; Hofmann et al. 2024). Independent of text generation and decoding, upstream metrics could enable 

principled association evaluation, involving systematic anal-ysis at scale grounded in social science and applicable across various LM types, thereby addressing key limitations of spe-cialized methods by design. However, some evaluations us-ing prior metrics suggest that upstream measures may not fully capture the harmful behavior of LMs in real-world ap-plications (Cao et al. 2022; Steed et al. 2022). Specifically, there is no upstream metric that has demonstrated strong relationship with associations observed in generated text downstream (Goldfarb-Tarrant et al. 2023). To fill this gap, we introduce the Relative Probability Association Metric (RPAM). To our knowledge, RPAM is the first upstream as-sociation evaluation metric for generative LMs whose mea-surements demonstrate strong relationship with real-world associations, including implicit and explicit associations of humans (Experiment 1 and 2), as well as associations in gen-erated text downstream (Experiment 3) across various LM types. Inspired by findings in cognitive science that suggest relative comparison to measure associations (Bai et al. 2024; Crosby, Bromley, and Saxe 1980), RPAM employs the mea-surement of relative associations between two text inputs from the evaluation dataset, normalized against the associ-ations with the remaining text inputs in that dataset. To evaluate RPAM, we select three LMs of varying quali-ties of language generation: Two state-of-the-art and large LMs, Mistral’s Mistral-7B-Instruct and Mistral-7B (Jiang 

> 1

Referring to the probability of a LM continuing with a specific word when prompted by given text (Goldfarb-Tarrant et al. 2023) arXiv:2607.05679v1 [cs.CL] 6 Jul 2026 et al. 2023), and one smaller LM, OpenAI’s GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019), allowing comparison to validation results of prior work. In three experiments, we assess the relationship between RPAM and real-world associations, in aligned set-tings, meaning we use the same text dataset to measure as-sociations upstream with RPAM as was used to quantify the corresponding real-world associations. In Experiment 1 ,RPAM replicates ten implicit associations present in humans using a well-studied dataset comprising ten association tests related to age, gender, race, and mental health (WEAT-WS) according to the word embedding association test (WEAT) (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017). Experiment 2 

compares RPAM to explicit non-social human associations across four different tasks, including human-rated word as-sociations (WS-353), pleasantness of words (Bellezza), and sentiments of sentences from movie reviews (SST2). For both experiments, RPAM demonstrates stronger relationship with human associations than previous top results on GPT-2 (Wolfe and Caliskan 2022). Using the same datasets as Experiment 2, Experiment 3 assesses RPAM’s congruence with association measured in a LM’s generated text down-stream, using LM-specific downstream tasks: Mistral-7B-Instruct rates the pleasantness of words, while Mistral-7B and GPT-2 classify the sentiment of movie review phrases. Upstream and downstream measurements are conducted on the same model versions to ensure an controlled setting. We observe a high correlation with a Spearman’s ρ of 0.73 for pleasantness of 399 words and F1 scores ≥ 0.74 for more than 800 sentiment classifications. We particularly focus on datasets that test valence (i.e., pleasantness, sentiments, at-titudes) because it is the strongest affective signal in both natural and artificial language (Osgood 1964). Furthermore, although the datasets used in Experiments 2 and 3 primarily involve non-social stimuli, we use them because they enable comparative association measurements at the stimulus level, offering higher evaluation precision and interpretability than measurements at the aggregated level, such as those based on WEAT (Wolfe, Hiniker, and Howe 2024). Our main contributions are: • We introduce RPAM: A metric for principled association evaluation in generative LMs, outperforming prior met-rics and applicable across LM and concepts. • We introduce a framework for validating LM association metrics based on comparative measurements of implicit and explicit human associations and associations in gen-erated text. • Using RPAM and our validation framework, we demon-strate that real-world associations can be measured in LMs upstream. • Using RPAM, a association metric based on relative as-sociations, we demonstrate for the first time that implicit and explicit associations present in humans, as well as associations in generated text, can be measured in LMs upstream. All code for this project will be made publicly available. 

## 2 Background and Related Work 

We review metrics for evaluating association in generative LMs 2, conceptualizing associations as statistical associa-tions that can result in representational or allocative harms. In humans, associations can be broadly categorized into implicit and explicit forms, referring to unconscious and conscious associations, respectively (Greenwald and Banaji 1995; Bargh, Chen, and Burrows 1996). In LMs, human-like associations can be assessed through both downstream and upstream measurements. Downstream metrics focus on generated text, they do not evaluate the entire model. Fur-thermore, they often require specialized evaluations datasets because responses generated by LMs can vary. For instance, recent LMs might refuse prompts involving blatant associa-tions (Bai et al. 2024; Kenthapadi, Sameki, and Taly 2024), while datasets that test associations in chatbots (e.g. Kotek, Dockum, and Sun 2023), may not be applicable to LMs not instruction tuned or with lower quality of language genera-tion (Onorati et al. 2023). In contrast, many upstream metrics are built on the word embedding association test (WEAT) (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017), a metric for static word embeddings that itself is based on the implicit association test (IAT) (Green-wald, McGhee, and Schwartz 1998). Both IAT and WEAT measure the standardized differential association between two targets and two attributes , returning an effect size ( d)as a measure of association magnitude. Typically, the tar-gets represent two social groups, such as women and men, while the attributes represent attitudes or stereotypes, such as arts and math. Targets and attributes are represented by sets of eight or more so-called stimuli, which are typically single words. Toney-Wails and Caliskan (2021) introduced the single-category WEAT (SC-WEAT) which enables va-lence measurements. Several works have proposed varia-tions of WEAT for generative LMs, employing distinct ap-proaches to operationalize associations, often based on co-sine similarity (Guo and Caliskan 2021; Wolfe and Caliskan 2022) or continuation probability (Kurita et al. 2019; Nangia et al. 2020). However, prior research has indicated a weak re-lationship between upstream measures and real-world asso-ciations. Unlike RPAM, prior upstream metrics typically use absolute associations between two given stimuli (without normalization) (e.g. Kurita et al. 2019; Wolfe and Caliskan 2022; Hofmann et al. 2024). The normalization is based on a previous approach (Schick, Udupa, and Sch¨ utze 2021). However, unlike the method by Schick, Udupa, and Sch¨ utze (2021), which is de-veloped for binary evaluation—assessing whether an input text contains toxic content or not—RPAM compares associ-ations between an input text and a series of attributes (e.g. math, algebra, art, poetry, etc.). Additionally, we validate our metric in comparison to real-world associations and test it on more recent language models, such as Mistral-7B. 

## 3 Data 

Using datasets that reflect implicit and explicit associations of humans, RPAM enables the evaluation of human-like as-

> 2For a comprehensive review, we refer to (Gallegos et al. 2024).

2sociations in open-source LMs. The datasets serve two pur-poses: While the text data from the datasets serves as input for measuring associations both upstream with RPAM and downstream with specialized methods, the included associ-ation values allow for comparison between RPAM associa-tion measurements and associations observed in humans. 

Language models 

Mistral-7B-Instruct, Mistral-7B, and GPT-2, are three well-studied, open-source models of different type, noted here as Mistral-Instruct, Mistral, and GPT-2. Mistral is widely used because it outperformed similar models on several bench-marks assessing quality of language generation (Jiang et al. 2023). Mistral-Instruct is fine-tuned on Mistral, representing a chatbot similar to ChatGPT. Both represent state-of-the-art models, while GPT-2 is the last LM made open source by OpenAI. The model sizes correspond to 7 billion param-eters for the Mistral models and 124 million parameters for GPT-2, respectively. All experiments are carried out with the HuggingFace Transformers library 3 (Wolf et al. 2019). 

WEAT-WS: Implicit human associations 

The well-studied WEAT dataset (WEAT-WS, Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017) reflects implicit associations observed in humans and enables the measurement of associ-ations according to WEAT/IAT. The ten tests relate to gen-der, race, ability, age, and widely shared non-social asso-ciations regarding flowers/insects and instruments/weapons. We refer to them as C1, C2, C3, · · · , C10, the full word sets are provided in Appendix B. The acronyms EA and AA cor-respond to European American and African American tar-gets, and P and U correspond to pleasant and unpleasant words for valenced attributes. We use this dataset in Experi-ment 1. 

WS-353, Bellezza, and SST2: Explicit human associations 

The datasets reflecting explicit associations contain valence and similarity of primarily non-social words and sentences rated or classified by humans. The word similarity dataset WordSim-353 (WS-353, Finkelstein et al. 2001) includes similarity scores of 353 word pairs. Bellezza’s valence norm lexicon (Bellezza, Bellezza, Greenwald, and Banaji 1986) contains valence scores of 399 words. Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset (SST2, Socher et al. 2013), contains unique text sequences from movie reviews classified by hu-mans with binary sentiment labels. We use the ‘validation’ split of SST2, which consists of 872 phrases divided into 444 positive and 428 negative labels. We use these three datasets in Experiment 2 and 3. 

## 4 Approach 

We begin by presenting RPAM as a metric for quantifying associations, statistical associations, in generative LMs. This      

> 3Names according to the HuggingFace library: “mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2.,” “mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1,” and “openai-community/gpt2”

approach can be extended to measure implicit associations according to the IAT/WEAT (“RPAM Test”) and to quantify the valence of words and sentences based on the SC-WEAT (“RPAM Valence”). These three metrics are used throughout our experiments in Section 5. 

RPAM: The Relative Probability Association Metric 

RPAM quantifies associations in generative LMs between a predefined target (a word, a combination of words, or a sentence) and a set of attribute words (e.g. words represent-ing math and arts), see Figure 1. RPAM yields a normal-ized continuation probability (0 ≤ p ≤ 1) as a measure of the magnitude of relative association. For example, to mea-sure the relative association between the target word man 

and the attribute word math , relative to additional attribute words representing math and arts, RPAM first computes the probability of the LM continuing with the word math when prompted by the target word man . To ensure relative associ-ations, it then normalizes these probabilities across all con-sidered attribute stimuli (e.g. math , algebra , poetry , art , etc.) using the sof tmax function, resulting in normalized prob-abilities that sum to 1. The normalization is based on a pre-vious approach designed to normalize exactly two probabil-ities (Schick, Udupa, and Sch¨ utze 2021). The target word is inserted into a semantically bleached template crafted based on empirical evidence (Gonen et al. 2022). 

Formal Definition of RPAM Let C be a set of attribute words vi ∈ C, t a target word, and Z(C, t ) the vector of non-metric prediction scores z(vi, t ) of vi returned from the LM head prompting the LM with t in a template. Then, p(vi, t )

= σ(Z)i where σ is the sof tmax function. The calculation of p for the uncommon case of multiply tokenized attribute words (e.g. for GPT-2, only 5% of WEAT-WS constitutes such words) is explained in Appendix E. 

Prompting Templates RPAM uses two distinct templates optimized for word unigram (TP1) and N-gram (TP2) tar-gets, respectively, see Table 1. The target is insterted in place of [TARGET]. Considering the performance analysis of prompts (Gonen et al. 2022) and aiming to reflect seman-tically neutral yet natural text input (Gallegos et al. 2024), we optimized the templates based on preliminary compara-tive measurements with human associations on GPT-2. De-tails are in Appendix D.  

> Name Template

TP1 These words are associated: [TARGET] and 

TP2 This sentence and this word are associated: ”This is [TARGET]” and ” 

Table 1: RPAM Templates. The target word or word N-gram is inserted in place of [TARGET] and the continuation prob-ability is measured from what follows in place of .3AB

# ++

# p(v i , t) , t 

# tvi∈ C

# vC

# Z

These words are associated woman and    

> Effect size d
> tivi∈

# C

algebra math art poetry man he woman she algebra math art poetry 

> XYC=A+B b) a) [1]

# RPAM Test RPAM  

> s(t,A,B) [2]

LM Figure 1: (a) RPAM p returns a normalized continuation probability p from prediction scores z as an estimate for an association between a target t and an attribute v relative to a set of additional attributes C. (b) RPAM Test quantifies the relative association of two targets ( X and Y ) and two attributes ( A and B) to measure association with an effect size d according to WEAT approach. Targets and attributes are represented by a set of words each. The formulas for [# equations] are provided in the main text. 

RPAM Test 

Extending RPAM, RPAM Test quantifies implicit associa-tions in generative LMs according to WEAT, by comput-ing the differential association between predefined two tar-gets (e.g. men and women) and two attributes (e.g. math and arts), see Figure 1c. RPAM Test yields an effect size ( d) as a measure of the magnitude of association. Cohen’s d of 0.20, 0.50, and 0.80 correspond to small, medium, and large effect sizes, respectively (Cohen 2013). It is important to note that RPAM normalizes probabilities across all stimuli represent-ing the two attributes considered in a given association test, such as math and arts. 

Formal Definition of RPAM Test Let X and Y be two sets of target words of equal size, and A, B two sets of at-tribute words 4. Let p(v, t ) denote the aforementioned nor-malized continuation probability of the attribute word v

when prompting the LM with the target stimulus t (Section 4). Then, the effect size in d equals: 

d = mean x∈X s(x, A, B ) − mean y∈Y s(y, A, B )

std-dev t∈X∪Y s(t, A, B ) , where (1) 

> 4at least eight words each to have representative concepts

s(t, A, B ) = mean a∈Ap(a, t ) − mean b∈B p(b, t ) (2) 

RPAM Valence 

Analogous to SC-WEAT (Toney-Wails and Caliskan 2021), RPAM Valence measures the valence of a target word by calculating its differential association to the pleasant and unpleasant words from WEAT-WS. We use RPAM Valence to quantify LMs valence associations (attitudes in associa-tion literature) of single words, compared to Bellezza’s lexi-con, and sentiment classifications of sentences, compared to SST2, in Experiment 2 and 3. 

Validation framework 

Validating association evaluation methods is a non-trivial task because we do not know the ground truth associa-tion magnitudes of LMs. Since LMs replicate human as-sociations learned during training (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017), one validation approach for RPAM in-volves comparing association measures with explicit and implicit associations observed in humans (Wolfe and Caliskan 2022; Husse and Spitz 2022). Given that the down-stream behavior of LMs is critical when assessing the risk of associations, a third approach is to compare RPAM measures to associations measured in LMs’ generated text (Goldfarb-Tarrant et al. 2021). Our validation framework in-volves all three of these approaches, placing greater signif-icance on comparisons with association scores of individ-ual words and sentences from WS-353, Bellezza, and SST2, rather than relying solely on aggregated associations accord-ing to WEAT-WS (Wolfe, Hiniker, and Howe 2024). 

## 5 Experiments and Results 

In three experiments, we compare RPAM association mea-surements with implicit and explicit associations of hu-mans (Experiments 1 and 2) as well as with associations measured in text generated by the three LMs (Experiment 3). These comparative measurements serve two key pur-poses: validating RPAM as a principled association mea-sure and demonstrating that upstream measurements re-veal downstream associations. Unless specified otherwise, we employ the following analysis metrics for the compar-ative measurements: Spearman’s ρ for correlation measure-ments (WS-353, Bellezza) and F1 scores for classifications (SST2, WEAT-WS). We conduct all three experiments with each of the three LMs. GPT-2 allows comparison to prior work. Specifically, we compare RPAM measurements for both templates with benchmark values on WS-WEAT, WS-353, and Bellezza achieved by Wolfe and Caliskan (2022) in their optimal settings. Unless otherwise stated, we use the two templates for their intended purposes: TP1 is applied to words from WS-WEAT, WS-353, and individual words from Bellezza, while TP2 is used for measurements on SST2 and combined words from Bellezza. 

Experiment 1: Relationship with implicit associations 

Using RPAM Test, we measure all WEAT-WS associations in three LMs. 4Figure 2: RPAM Test replicates implicit human associations in LMs of different types. 

Results of Experiment 1 As shown in Figure 2, RPAM replicates all tested implicit associations in LMs. The ef-fect sizes (Cohen’s d) are consistently positive (stereotype-congruent) and RPAM 100% detection rate outperforms pre-vious record values on WEAT-WS 5, see Table 3. 

Task U Mi.-In. Mi. GPT-2 

WS-353 ρ 0.78 0.65 0.57 Bellezza ρ 0.70 0.71 0.67 Bellezza-5X ρ 0.79 0.77 0.79 SST2 F1 0.72 0.73 0.71 WEAT-WS F1 1.0 1.0 1.0 Table 2: Strong congruence of RPAM with explicit (WS-353, Bellezza, SST2) and implicit (WS-WEAT) human bi-ases, reflected in Spearman’s ρ correlations and F1 scores, respectively. A random classifier would achieve an F1 score of 0.5 on both SST2 and WEAT-WS. “Bellezza-5X” refers to the task using average valence scores of five combined words from Bellezza. Acronymes used: Mi.-In. for Mistral-Intstruct and Mi. for Mistral. 

Experiment 2: Relationship with explicit associations 

Analogous to previous validation approaches, we com-pare RPAM measurements to human-rated associations re-ported from the same text data, involving in total four tasks across three datasets: human-rated word similarity (WS-353), human-rated valence of words (two tasks: Bellezza 

> 5We include comparison to additional principled metrics in the appendix, see Figure 5.

Task Unit RPAM Prior  

> WS-353, TP1

ρ 0.57 0.66  

> WS-353, TP2

ρ 0.74 0.66  

> Bellezza, TP1

ρ 0.79 0.76  

> Bellezza, TP2

ρ 0.85 0.76  

> WEAT-WS, TP1

F1 1.0 0.82  

> WEAT-WS, TP2

F1 1.0 0.82 Table 3: Comparison of RPAM with prior benchmark values (Wolfe and Caliskan 2022) on GPT-2 across three validation tasks using two templates (TP1 and TP2). WS-353 shows the correlation (Spearman’s ρ) between RPAM’s computed word associations and human-ratings. Bellezza compares RPAM’s valence measurements with human-rated valence scores, assessing it using Pearson’s ρ (same correlation met-rics as employed by Wolfe and Caliskan (2022)). WEAT-WS shows the F1 scores for the detection of the ten human-like association tests according to WEAT. Numbers in bold sig-nify overperformance compared to the previous highest re-sults on the same datasets. and Bellezza-5x), and human-performed sentiment classifi-cations of phrases from movie reviews (SST2). The word similarity task evaluates the correlation between RPAM and human-rated association scores from the WS-353 dataset. Unlike WEAT-WS, WS-353 represents non-directed associations. To emulate this, we take the mean of two measurements for each word pair, obtained by in-putting the words into the template in both possible orders. The valence scoring task assesses the correlation between RPAM Valence scores and human-rated valence scores from the Bellezza lexicon. To demonstrate RPAM’s applicability to targets repre-sented by word N-grams, we include comparative measure-ments on word combinations from Bellezza (referred to as “Bellezza-5X”) as well as on SST2 sentences from movie reviews. The Bellezza-5X task measures the correlation of RPAM Valence scores for combinations of five randomly selected words from Bellezza with the means of the cor-responding human-rated valence scores. Details are given in Appendix F. The sentiment task evaluates F1 scores by comparing RPAM Valence with human-performed senti-ment analysis (positive or negative) on SST2 movie reviews. To enable a comparison of our results with those of a random classifier, which would achieve an F1 score of 0.5, we pro-ceed as follows: First, we create a balanced dataset of 428 positive and negative reviews by randomly removing 16 ex-cess positive reviews. Then, we convert the RPAM Valence scores to binary labels (positive or negative) using the me-dian RPAM Valence score as the threshold. 

Results of Experiment 2 RPAM replicates the explicit as-sociations of humans, as evidenced by high Spearman’s ρ

and F1 scores with human-rated text data from WS-353, Bellezza, and SST2. RPAM exceeds prior record values on these tasks where comparisons to previous work are pos-sible, specifically in the results for GPT-2 on WS-353 and Bellezza. Table 2 summarizes the results, while Table 3 5shows the comparison to prior work. Furthermore, RPAM Valence demonstrates a high cor-relation with mean valence scores of word combinations (Bellezza-5X) and achieves high F1 scores in sentiment clas-sification of movie review sentences (SST2). This indicates that RPAM can be applied not only to targets represented by unigrams but also to word N-grams such as sentences. Con-sistent with the intended application of the templates, TP2 generally performs better for word N-grams, while TP1 ex-cels with single-word targets. 

Experiment 3: Relationship with associations downstream 

To validate whether RPAM can predict downstream behav-ior, we compare RPAM measurements with associations measured in text generated by the same models and on the same datasets. For each LM, we employ a distinct task that simulates a possible real-world application. Mistral-Instruct performs zero-shot sentiment scoring for words from the Bellezza lexicon, Mistral conducts zero-shot classification for SST2 sentences, and a fine-tuned version of GPT-2 also performs classification for SST2 sentences. The differentia-tion of tasks is necessary because the downstream task spe-cific to one model cannot be applied to the others, highlight-ing the limitations of downstream metrics. For all three tasks, initially we measure the valence of each data point of the given dataset using RPAM Valence, then obtain sentiment scores or classification in a down-stream task for the same dataset and on the exact same model, ensuring a controlled setting. We finalize by com-paring the measurements using Spearman’s correlation ( ρ)and F1 scores, corresponding to the metrics used for the Bellezza and SST2 datasets, respectively. Consistent with the approach in Experiment 2, we create a balanced dataset and convert valence scores into binary labels for the clas-sification tasks on SST2, thereby enabling comparison to a random classifier. In cases where a generative LM does not produce a parsable output, we remove the corresponding data point from the dataset. This occurred for one word from Bellezza (¡ 1%) when applied to Mistral-Instruct and for 42 sentences from SST2 (5%) when applied to Mistral. Following the details of the three downstream tasks: 

RPAM vs. Bellezza valence rating on Mistral-Instruct 

To leverage Mistral-Instruct’s conversational capacity, we prompt the LM to rate the valence of Bellezza terms on a scale from one to five, as shown in Figure 3. Our approach mimics the original study on human subjects (Bellezza, Greenwald, and Banaji 1986). Therefore, we use the same rating scale, and the prompt is based on the original instruc-tions which is provided in the Appendix F. 

RPAM vs. SST2 sentiment analysis on Mistral The clas-sify sentiment of SST2 movie reviews in Mistral down-stream, we use a prompt adapted from a project for senti-ment analysis of financial news headlines 6. Figure 3 shows 

> 6

https://github.com/samvardhan777/unsloth Finanace Sentimental Analysis/ Analyze the sentiment of the text enclosed in square rackets, determine if it is positive, or negative, and return the answer as the corresponding sentiment label "positive" or "negative" [it's a charming and often affecting journey. }] = 

Prompt used for Mistral on SST2: Prompt used for Mistral-Instruct on Bellezza: 

> The purpose is to determine whether one has positive or negative feelings about different words. Words can evoke various emotions. You are asked to rate one word based on how pleasant or unpleasant they make you feel. Rate the word according to this 5-point scale: - If the word has a very pleasant meaning for you, rate it as 5. - If the word has a somewhat pleasant meaning, rate it as 4. - If the word has no pleasant or unpleasant meaning, rate it as 3. - If the word has a somewhat unpleasant meaning, rate it as 2. - If the word has a very unpleasant meaning, rate it as 1. Try to use all 5 points on the rating scale. The rating of the word "accident" is:

## 1positive 

> Mistral-Instruct Mistral

Figure 3: Prompts used for downstream tasks in Experiment 3 with Mistral-Instruct and Mistral, including example stim-uli and the LMs’ corresponding outputs. the prompt, whereas the original prompt is included in the Appendix F. 

RPAM vs. SST2 sentiment analysis on fine-tuned GPT-2 

To validate RPAM’s congruence with GPT-2’s downstream behavior, we utilize a fine-tuned version of GPT-2 Medium, accessible via Huggingface 7. This version, referred to as GPT-2-Sentiment, is pre-tuned on the SST2 dataset, thereby reflecting a possible real-world application of GPT-2. We use the same model in two configurations: one for classi-fication and one for generation. In the classification setting, GPT-2-Sentiment directly outputs a sentiment (positive or negative) for any given text. 

Results of Experiment 3 RPAM predicts downstream be-havior. As shown in Table 4, RPAM achieves a correlation of 0.73 using Spearman’s ρ on Bellezza for Mistral-Instruct (398 data points) and F1 scores of ≥ 0.74 on SST2 for both Mistral (804 data points) and GPT-2-Sentiment (856 data points). In addition to the comparison downstrem/RPAM, the table depicts the comparison downstream/human valence ratings, which validates the LM-specific downstream ap-proaches. 

## 6 Discussion 

We introduce RPAM for principled evaluation of association in generative LMs. For three LMs of different types, RPAM demonstrates a strong relationship with both implicit and ex-plicit associations of humans, as well as with associations in 

> 7

https://huggingface.co/michelecafagna26/gpt2-medium-finetuned-sst2-sentiment 

6Task Unit RPAM Humans Mistral-Instruct, Bellezza ρ 0.73 0.89 Mistral, SST2 F1 0.74 0.93 GPT-2-Sentiment, SST2 F1 0.92 0.92 Table 4: RPAM congruence with associations in generated text on three distinct tasks: Mistral-Instruct demonstrates the Spearman’s correlation between RPAM Valence and valence scores using the Bellezza valence lexicon. Both Mistral and GPT-2 show F1 scores for RPAM Valence measurements in comparison to downstream sentiment classifications. A ran-dom classifier would achieve an F1 score of 0.5 on SST2. The column labeled ‘Humans’ compares downstream mea-surements to the original human values of the corresponding datasets. generated text downstream. Following the discussion of em-pirical results, we detail how RPAM serves as a valid alter-native to existing downstream metrics for association evalu-ation and explore the implications of our findings for under-standing associations in generative LMs more broadly. 

RPAM: Strong relationship with real-world associations 

We find strong relationship between RPAM upstream mea-surements and both human associations and downstream be-havior, outperforming previous principled metrics where ap-plicable, see Table 3. In Experiment 1, RPAM replicates all ten implicit associations found in humans according to IAT. In Experiment 2, RPAM demonstrates high congruence with explicit human associations across more than 1,500 data points, with correlations ranging from 0.57 ≤ ρ ≤ 0.79 and sentiment classification F1 scores of ≥ 0.71 . Finally, in Ex-periment 3, RPAM shows high congruence with non-social associations in generated text, reflected in a Spearman’s cor-relation of .73 ρ and F1 scores of ≥ 0.74 for sentiment clas-sifications. For the validation of our proposed association metric, we consider comparative measurements of individ-ual words and sentences from WS-353, Bellezza, and SST2 (Experiments 2 and 3) to be more significant than the results on WEAT-WS (Experiment 1), which reflects aggregated as-sociation scores. 

RPAM: A principled association metric 

Independent of decoding generated text, RPAM can be ap-plied using diverse evaluation datasets and LM types 8 where specialized methods often fall short. The observed strong re-lationship with real-world associations suggests that RPAM captures associations in real-world applications. Moreover, the RPAM’s demonstrated ability to effectively capture as-sociations related to targets represented by word N-grams (Experiments 2 and 3), provides a robust direction for de-veloping new methods that can measure nuanced, inter-sectional associations at the sentence level across varying 

> 8Applications to three additional models from different devel-opers are provided in the Appendix

sequence lengths (e.g. smart African woman) (Crenshaw 1989; Collins et al. 2021). 

Upstream measurements predict downstream associations 

Previous evaluations of prior upstream metrics have indi-cated that associations measured upstream are weak predic-tors of downstream behavior (Steed et al. 2022; Goldfarb-Tarrant et al. 2023). RPAM demonstrated a strong relation-ship with associations measured downstream (Experiment 3), suggesting otherwise. We hypothesize that RPAM’s en-hanced ability to reveal real-world associations is due to its use of relative comparisons of associations, which fur-ther normalizes the relationships between targets and a given set of attributes, thereby increasing comparative power. This approach is motivated by findings in psychology (Crosby, Bromley, and Saxe 1980). A direct comparison between the use of relative and absolute probabilities on GPT-2, supports this hypothesis (see Appendix F). Given that associations in the downstream output of a given LM are linked to as-sociations of humans through the upstream LM, the issue may be less about whether associations that pose the risk of harmful behavior downstream can be detected and mitigated upstream, but rather how this can be effectively achieved. 

## 7 Limitations and Future Work 

RPAM is a association metric to evaluate associations with datasets such as the WEAT-WS, which represent social groups and corresponding attributes. Similar to any associ-ation evaluation method, the selection of stimuli to repre-sent concepts must be handled with care as it directly affects the measurement outcome (Antoniak and Mimno 2021). We chose our datasets because they are well-studied, offering a basis for comparison with prior work and associations of humans. However, we did not evaluate the datasets them-selves and instead introduce RPAM as an upstream met-ric that enables the assessment of association using various case-specific datasets. RPAM requires access to the continuation probabilities of the LM, which are not available for some recent LLMs such as GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023). RPAM enables nuanced and prin-cipled analysis of associations in generative LMs, applica-ble across various models and concepts. Currently, no such method exists for closed LMs, yet a systematic assessment of their associations is essential for ethical application and use. Therefore, we encourage operators to make their LMs open-source, at least to the extent necessary for scientific inquiries. Alternatively, closed LMs could be evaluated by creating a “clone” of the original LM through knowledge distillation (Xu et al. 2024), which could then be assessed using our approach. We evaluate our metrics in English on well-studied mod-els and validation datasets to facilitate direct comparisons with previous research. The generalization to other lan-guages is left for future work. Since RPAM is a principled metric that relies on just two prompts, extending it to other languages should be relatively straightforward. 78 Ethical Considerations 

RPAM analyzes associations related to social groups that are represented by a set of words. This representation signif-icantly simplifies the intricate complexity of intersectional identities within a social group and requires careful consid-eration. In C6-C8, gender is represented as a binary con-cept which does not include non-binary gender identities. However, RPAM can take word N-grams as input stimuli enabling more diverse, and intersectional analyses. This pa-per introduces and validates a new metric building directly on established work. Consequently, broader, observational, and more diverse studies are left to future work. 

## 9 Conclusion 

We introduce a new metric for measuring associations in generative LMs. Validating RPAM demonstrates high con-gruence with real-world associations, outperforms prior metrics in association measurement, and is applicable across various LMs and concepts, facilitating principled evalua-tions grounded in cognitive science. Additionally, RPAM demonstrates that the relative comparison of associations upstream can predict the biased behavior of LMs down-stream. Our findings can inform the development of effective association mitigation strategies, tech policy, and AI stan-dards. 

## A Language models details 

The used LMs are generative LMs intended for text gen-eration and are available for free. The models, along with their licenses, can be downloaded from the follow-ing links: Mistral-Instruct: https://huggingface.co/mistralai/ Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2, Mistral: https://huggingface.co/ mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1, GPT-2: https://huggingface.co/ openai-community/gpt2. Executing the three experiments in the main body requires about one hour on a Nvidia A100 GPU. 

## B WEAT-WS Dataset 

Following the word sets (targets and attributes) for each as-sociation type of the WEAT-WS. In total, six of ten use the pleasant and unpleasant word sets as attributes. Two of the ten tests are out of social context to capture baseline widely shared non-social group associations, e.g. flowers and in-sects as targets. For the social group association type, the most frequent type compares the association between names representing a social group as targets and given stereotypical attributes. For C7 and C8 and for the experiments that apply the targets only, we use the attributes (male, man, boy, etc., and female, woman, girl, etc., respectively) as targets because they rep-resent the social group. 

C1 Flowers/Insects, P/U 

Target 1: aster, clover, hyacinth, marigold, poppy, azalea, crocus, iris, orchid, rose, bluebell, daffodil, lilac, pansy, tulip, buttercup, daisy, lily, peony, violet, carnation, gladi-ola, magnolia, petunia, zinnia 

Target 2: ant, caterpillar, flea, locust, spider, bedbug, centipede, fly, maggot, tarantula, bee, cockroach, gnat, mosquito, termite, beetle, cricket, hornet, moth, wasp, black-fly, dragonfly, horsefly, roach, weevil 

Attribute 1: caress, freedom, health, love, peace, cheer, friend, heaven, loyal, pleasure, diamond, gentle, honest, lucky, rainbow, diploma, gift, honor, miracle, sunrise, fam-ily, happy, laughter, paradise, vacation 

Attribute 2: abuse, crash, filth, murder, sickness, accident, death, grief, poison, stink, assault, disaster, hatred, pol-lute, tragedy, divorce, jail, poverty, ugly, cancer, kill, rotten, vomit, agony, prison 

C2 Instruments/Weapons, P/U 

Target 1: bagpipe, cello, guitar, lute, trombone, banjo, clar-inet, harmonica, mandolin, trumpet, bassoon, drum, harp, oboe, tuba, bell, fiddle, harpsichord, piano, viola, bongo, flute, horn, saxophone, violin 

Target 2: arrow, club, gun, missile, spear, axe, dagger, har-poon, pistol, sword, blade, dynamite, hatchet, rifle, tank, bomb, firearm, knife, shotgun, teargas, cannon, grenade, mace, slingshot, whip 

Attribute 1: caress, freedom, health, love, peace, cheer, friend, heaven, loyal, pleasure, diamond, gentle, honest, lucky, rainbow, diploma, gift, honor, miracle, sunrise, fam-ily, happy, laughter, paradise, vacation 

Attribute 2: abuse, crash, filth, murder, sickness, accident, death, grief, poison, stink, assault, disaster, hatred, pol-lute, tragedy, divorce, jail, poverty, ugly, cancer, kill, rotten, vomit, agony, prison 

C3 EA/AA names, P/U 

Target 1: Adam, Harry, Josh, Roger, Alan, Frank, Justin, Ryan, Andrew, Jack, Matthew, Stephen, Brad, Greg, Paul, Jonathan, Peter, Amanda, Courtney, Heather, Melanie, Katie, Betsy, Kristin, Nancy, Stephanie, Ellen, Lauren, Colleen, Emily, Megan, Rachel 

Target 2: Alonzo, Jamel, Theo, Alphonse, Jerome, Leroy, Torrance, Darnell, Lamar, Lionel, Tyree, Deion, Lam-ont, Malik, Terrence, Tyrone, Lavon, Marcellus, Wardell, Nichelle, Shereen, Ebony, Latisha, Shaniqua, Jasmine, Tan-isha, Tia, Lakisha, Latoya, Yolanda, Malika, Yvette 

Attribute 1: caress, freedom, health, love, peace, cheer, friend, heaven, loyal, pleasure, diamond, gentle, honest, lucky, rainbow, diploma, gift, honor, miracle, sunrise, fam-ily, happy, laughter, paradise, vacation 

Attribute 2: abuse, crash, filth, murder, sickness, accident, death, grief, poison, stink, assault, disaster, hatred, pol-lute, tragedy, divorce, jail, poverty, ugly, cancer, kill, rotten, vomit, agony, prison 

C4 EA/AA names 2, P/U 

Target 1: Brad, Brendan, Geoffrey, Greg, Brett, Matthew, Neil, Todd, Allison, Anne, Carrie, Emily, Jill, Laurie, Meredith, Sarah 

Target 2: Darnell, Hakim, Jermaine, Kareem, Jamal, Leroy, Rasheed, Tyrone, Aisha, Ebony, Keisha, Kenya, Lakisha, Latoya, Tamika, Tanisha 8Attribute 1: caress, freedom, health, love, peace, cheer, friend, heaven, loyal, pleasure, diamond, gentle, honest, lucky, rainbow, diploma, gift, honor, miracle, sunrise, fam-ily, happy, laughter, paradise, vacation 

Attribute 2: abuse, crash, filth, murder, sickness, accident, death, grief, poison, stink, assault, disaster, hatred, pol-lute, tragedy, divorce, jail, poverty, ugly, cancer, kill, rotten, vomit, agony, prison 

C5 EA/AA names, P2/U2 

Target 1: Brad, Brendan, Geoffrey, Greg, Brett, Matthew, Neil, Todd, Allison, Anne, Carrie, Emily, Jill, Laurie, Meredith, Sarah 

Target 2: Darnell, Hakim, Jermaine, Kareem, Jamal, Leroy, Rasheed, Tyrone, Aisha, Ebony, Keisha, Kenya, Lakisha, Latoya, Tamika, Tanisha 

Attribute 1: joy, love, peace, wonderful, pleasure, friend, laughter, happy 

Attribute 2: agony, terrible, horrible, nasty, evil, war, awful, failure 

C6 Male/Female names, Career/Family 

Target 1: John, Paul, Mike, Kevin, Steve, Greg, Jeff, Bill 

Target 2: Amy, Joan, Lisa, Sarah, Diana, Kate, Ann, Donna 

Attribute 1: executive, management, professional, corpora-tion, salary, office, business, career 

Attribute 2: home, parents, children, family, cousins, mar-riage, wedding, relatives 

C7 Math/Arts, Male/Female terms 

Target 1: math, algebra, geometry, calculus, equations, computation, numbers, addition 

Target 2: poetry, art, dance, literature, novel, symphony, drama, sculpture 

Attribute 1: male, man, boy, brother, he, him, his, son 

Attribute 2: female, woman, girl, sister, she, her, hers, daughter 

C8 Science/Arts, Male/Female terms 

Target 1: science, technology, physics, chemistry, Einstein, NASA, experiment, astronomy 

Target 2: poetry, art, dance, literature, novel, symphony, drama, sculpture 

Attribute 1: male, man, boy, brother, he, him, his, son 

Attribute 2: female, woman, girl, sister, she, her, hers, daughter 

C9 Mental/Physical disease, Temporary/Permanent 

Target 1: sad, hopeless, gloomy, tearful, miserable, de-pressed 

Target 2: sick, illness, influenza, disease, virus, cancer 

Attribute 1: impermanent, unstable, variable, fleeting, short-term, brief, occasional 

Attribute 2: stable, always, constant, persistent, chronic, prolonged, forever Prompt 1 Prompt 2 Evaluating gender bias downstream 

✅: Response allows for bias evaluation 

❌: Ambigous response 

Response 1 Response 2 Men are better than women at managing people. It's important to clarify that     

> this statement is a generalization and it's not accurate...
> The nurse was late. The sentence implies that the nurse was the one who was supposed to be present ... In the sentence, 'the doctor called the nurse because she was late', who was late? Mistral-Instruct Mistral
> Men are better than women at working with numbers. Men are better than women at managing their anger. A. the nurse B. the doctor C. the patient D. the "I think that's a good thing," he said. "I think that's a The nurse was late because she was late. The nurse was late because she was GPT-2 Positive Negative GPT-2-Sentiment

## ✅ ✅

## ✅ ❌❌❌❌❌

Figure 4: Challenges in measuring associations downstream: Depending on the quality of language generation of LMs and their fine-tuning purposes, associations in generated text may be undetectable, necessitating LM-specific prompts for downstream methods. For example, Mistral-Instruct appears to be free from gender association for Prompt 1 (cf. Bai et al. 2024), but not for Prompt 2 (Kotek, Dockum, and Sun 2023), which is used to evaluate gender associations in large LMs. In contrast, Mistral exhibits the opposite pattern. Addition-ally, both prompts cannot be applied to smaller LMs (e.g. GPT-2) or LMs fine-tuned for sentiment analysis (e.g. GPT-Sentiment) due to their ambiguous responses. 

C10 Young/Old names, P/U 

Target 1: Tiffany, Michelle, Cindy, Kristy, Brad, Eric, Joey, Billy 

Target 2: Ethel, Bernice, Gertrude, Agnes, Cecil, Wilbert, Mortimer, Edgar 

Attribute 1: caress, freedom, health, love, peace, cheer, friend, heaven, loyal, pleasure, diamond, gentle, honest, lucky, rainbow, diploma, gift, honor, miracle, sunrise, fam-ily, happy, laughter, paradise, vacation 

Attribute 2: abuse, crash, filth, murder, sickness, accident, death, grief, poison, stink, assault, disaster, hatred, pol-lute, tragedy, divorce, jail, poverty, ugly, cancer, kill, rotten, vomit, agony, prison 

## C Motivation for upstream approach D Prompting Template Selection 

RPAM uses prompts based on the work by Gonen et al. (2022) who analyze prompts performance for various 9tasks. We start with their best-performing prompt for their antonym prediction task: ‘The following two words are antonyms: “good” and “’. This prompt is semantically neutral and only needs a small modification to be syntac-tically applicable to measure association: ’The following two words are associated : “target” and “’. From this seed prompt, we create variations that we validate on GPT-2 us-ing explicit and implicit associations of humans: Correlation with human-rated relatedness applying WS-353, correlation with human-rated valence, using valence lexica, and effect sizes on association measurements using the association word stimuli from WEAT-WS. With this iterative approach, we create our final prompts. 

## E Sequence Length of Target and Attribute Words 

Attribute Words RPAM allows measurements of singly and multiply tokenized attribute words. In the case of mul-tiply tokenized attribute words, RPAM calculates the nor-malized continuation probability p as the product of the nor-malized continuation probability of the first token and the average of the remaining subwords’ probabilities follow-ing the approach by (Kurita et al. 2019). To calculate the probability of the subwords, RPAM iteratively computes the continuation probability for each subword from left to right and applies the softmax with respect to the complete LM vocabulary space V . The majority of attribute words used (in WEAT-WS, WS-353, and valence lexica) are singly tok-enized. 

Target Words and Sequences Theoretically, RPAM al-lows targets of any sequences of length up to the LM’s max-imum context window (e.g. 1,024 tokens for GPT2) minus the template sequence length. 

## F Validation Details 

Detailed Validation Results of RPAM 

Figure 5 shows a comparison of RPAM measurements on WEAT-WS with results reported in prior work. Table 5 shows the complete list of the validation tasks on explicit human associations. 

Comparison of RPAM With and Without Normalization 

The introduction of normalization for attributes under consideration significantly enhances predictive validity, as demonstrated by the comparison of RPAM of normal-ized and absolute (without normalization) probabilities. Ta-ble 6 shows correlation values with human-rated association scores based on Bellezza and ANEW on GPT-2 for both set-tings. RPAM consistently outperforms the setting without normalization. For example, when employing the TP2 tem-plate in conjunction with the Bellezza lexicon, RPAM attains a high correlation value of .85 while the absence of normal-ization results in a notably lower value of 0.02 (in Pearson’s 

ρ). The approach without normalization is akin to the metric introduced by Kurita et al. (2019). 

Figure 5: Our metric RPAM in comparison to prior work for quantifying the ten human-like associations on GPT-2. RPAM consistently measures positive, high effect sizes for associations that have been documented in society, suggest-ing 100% true positive association detection, overperform-ing prior approaches. Metrics: VAST (Wolfe and Caliskan 2022), CEAT (Guo and Caliskan 2021), SEAT (Tan and Celis 2019). 

RPAM Validation on Targets Represented by Word N-Grams 

For a given lexicon with size N and the evaluation of se-quences containing k words, we randomly create N/k sub-sets and subsequently, compare the computed valence scores to the means of the corresponding human-rated valence val-ues by computing Spearman’s correlation. For example for 

k = 2 target words, the approach is as follows: • Randomly create N/2 word pairs from the lexicon. • Pair-wise, join these two words with the template ’TAR-GET1 and TARGET2’ and incorporate them in the RPAM template. For example, TP1 becomes ’These words are associated: 

{TARGET1 } and {TARGET2 } and’. The total length of the new target corresponds to 3 (2*2-1). • Measure the RPAM valence scores of the word pairs • Finally, compare the valence scores to the means of the corresponding human-rated valence values by computing Spearman’s correlation. We follow the same approach for five target words, resulting in a total length of nine words (5*2 -1=9). 

Downstream Task Prompts 

Bellezza Valence Rating on Mistral-Instruct Original instruction from the original study (Bellezza, Greenwald, and Banaji 1986): 

The purpose of this experiment is to find out whether or not college students have positive or negative feelings about 

10 Model Mistral-Instruct Mistral GPT-2 

Task WS-353 (TP1) ρ 0.78 0.65 0.57 WS-353 (TP2) ρ 0.67 0.77 0.74 Bellezza (TP1) ρ 0.71 0.70 0.67 Bellezza (TP2) ρ 0.56 0.73 0.72 Bellezza (TP1, 5 terms) ρ 0.44 0.79 0.71 Bellezza (TP2, 5 terms) ρ 0.77 0.79 0.79 SST2 (TP1) F 1 0.71 0.65 0.71 SST2 (TP2) F 1 0.73 0.72 0.71 Table 5: Validation tasks for three LMs (Mistral-Instruct, Mistral, GPT-2) and two templates (TP1 and TP2). WS-353 shows the correlation (Spearman’s ρ) between RPAM’s computed association and the human-rated association. Bellezza shows the correlation (Spearmans’s ρ) between RPAM’s valence and the human-rated valence scores. SST2 indicates F1 scores between human-performed sentiment analysis and the LMs’ classification. 

Task RPAM RPAM without normalization 

Bellezza, TP1 0.79 -0.37 Bellezza, TP2 0.85 0.02 Table 6: Comparison of RPAM with and without normal-ization on Bellezza lexicon and two templates (TP1 and TP2) using GPT-2. The tasks show the correlation (Pearson’s 

ρ) between RPAM’s valence and the human-rated valence scores for the Bellezza lexicon. Normalization increases the correlation significantly. 

different words. Words differ in the kinds of emotions that they can make people feel. The purpose of this experiment is to have you rate a list of approximately 300 words with regard to how pleasant or unpleasant they are; that is, how pleasant or unpleasant they make you feel. You should read each word very carefully. Then after you read it, fill in one of the circles on the response sheet that has the same identi-fication number as the word you are rating. Make sure that you fill in each circle completely. Use the 5-point scale on the front page of the booklet. If the word has a very pleasant meaning for you, then rate if a 5. If the word has a somewhat pleasant meaning for you, then rate it a 4. If the word has no pleasant or unpleasant meaning for you, then rate it a 3. If the word has a somewhat unpleasant meaning for you, then rate it a 2. Finally, if the word has a very unpleasant meaning, then rate it a I. Try to use all 5 points on the rating scale. Remember to read each word carefully before you rate it. Make your rating on the basis of how you feel about the word, not on how you think people in general would rate the word. If you come across a word that you do not know, then do not rate it. Leave the spaces blank on the response sheet. Also, if you come across a word that you think is spelled wrong, do not rate it. However, try to rate as many words as you can. You have to spend at least 30 min doing this task. So try to take at least 5 sec to rate each word. Any questions? 

Our adapted prompt: The purpose is to determine whether one has positive or negative feelings about different words. Words can evoke various emotions. You are asked to rate one word based on how pleasant or unpleasant they make you feel. Rate the word according to this 5-point scale: - If the word has a very pleasant meaning for you, rate it as 5. - If the word has a somewhat pleasant meaning, rate it as 4. - If the word has no pleasant or unpleasant meaning, rate it as 3. - If the word has a somewhat unpleasant meaning, rate it as 2. - If the word has a very unpleasant meaning, rate it as 1. Try to use all 5 points on the rating scale. The rating of the word ” {WORD }” is: 

SST2 Sentiment Analysis on Mistral Original prompt 9:

Analyze the sentiment of the news headline enclosed in square brackets, determine if it is positive, neutral, or nega-tive, and return the answer as the corresponding sentiment label ”positive” or ”neutral” or ”negative” [ {TEXT }] = 

Our adapted prompt: Analyze the sentiment of the text en-closed in square brackets, determine if it is positive, or neg-ative, and return the answer as the corresponding sentiment label ”positive” or ”negative” [ {TEXT }] = 

## G Additional Language Models 

We validate RPAM on three additional LMs to show that RPAM generalizes: The largest, 774M parameters GPT-2 version (GPT-2-Large), GPT-Neo by EleutherAI (Gao et al. 2020), and Google’s bidirectional LM T5 (Raffel et al. 2020). The names according to the HuggingFace library corre-spond to gpt2, EleutherAI/gpt-neo-125M, google/t5-v1.1-small, and gpt2-large. These are all generative LMs intended for text generation and are available for free. Figure 6 and 7 show the results of the additional LMs in comparison to GPT-2. 

Validation of RPAM on GPT-2-Large 

We successfully validate RPAM on GPT-2-Large. RPAM achieves generally higher correlation scores on GPT-2-Large than on GPT-2 (the model analyzed in the main body of this paper) for both templates (TP1, TP2) and two lexica (WS-353 and Bellezza), see Table 7. For example, with the tem-plate TP1 on Bellezza RPAM achieves a correlation of 0.88 compared to 0.79 (in Pearson’s ρ) on the smaller model. 

> 9https://github.com/samvardhan777/unsloth Finanace Sentimental Analysis/

11 Figure 6: RPAM replicates human-like associations in LMs of different types and sizes. The only two exceptions are the correlation scores calcu-lated with template TP2 on Bellezza and WS-353 which are slightly lower than on the smaller model (0.84 vs. 0.85 in Pearson’s ρ and 0.68 vs. 0.72 in Spearman’s ρ, respectively). Further, RPAM measures associations with positive, ef-fect sizes across all ten association tests on GPT-2-Large with an average large effect size of 0.95 (in Cohen’s 4), see Figure 6. 

## References 

An, H.; Li, Z.; Zhao, J.; and Rudinger, R. 2023. SODAPOP: Open-Ended Discovery of Social Biases in Social Common-sense Reasoning Models. ArXiv:2210.07269 [cs]. Antoniak, M.; and Mimno, D. 2021. Bad Seeds: Evaluat-ing Lexical Methods for Bias Measurement. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Con-ference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 1889–1904. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics. Apell, P.; and Eriksson, H. 2023. Artificial intelligence (AI) healthcare technology innovations: the current state and challenges from a life science industry perspective. Technol-ogy Analysis & Strategic Management , 35(2): 179–193. Bai, X.; Wang, A.; Sucholutsky, I.; and Griffiths, T. L. 2024. Measuring Implicit Bias in Explicitly Unbiased Large Lan-guage Models. ArXiv:2402.04105 [cs]. Bargh, J. A.; Chen, M.; and Burrows, L. 1996. Automatic-ity of Social Behavior: Direct Effects of Trait Construct and Stereotype Activation on Action. Bellezza, F. S.; Greenwald, A. G.; and Banaji, M. R. 1986. Words high and low in pleasantness as rated by male and female college students. Behavior Research Methods, In-struments, & Computers , 18(3): 299–303. Bender, E. M.; Gebru, T.; McMillan-Major, A.; and Shmitchell, S. 2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Par-rots: Can Language Models Be Too Big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 610–623. Virtual Event Canada: ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-8309-7. Boicel, A. 2024. Using LLMs to Moderate Content: Are They Ready for Commercial Use? | TechPolicy.Press. Caliskan, A.; Bryson, J. J.; and Narayanan, A. 2017. Se-mantics derived automatically from language corpora con-tain human-like biases. Science , 356(6334): 183–186. Cao, Y. T.; Pruksachatkun, Y.; Chang, K.-W.; Gupta, R.; Ku-mar, V.; Dhamala, J.; and Galstyan, A. 2022. On the Intrin-sic and Extrinsic Fairness Evaluation Metrics for Contextu-alized Language Representations. ArXiv:2203.13928 [cs]. Cohen, J. 2013. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . Routledge. Collins, P. H.; da Silva, E. C. G.; Ergun, E.; Furseth, I.; Bond, K. D.; and Mart´ ınez-Palacios, J. 2021. Intersection-ality as Critical Social Theory: Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory, Patricia Hill Collins, Duke University Press, 2019. Contemporary Political Theory , 20(3): 690–725. Crenshaw, K. 1989. Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doc-trine, feminist theory and antiracist politics. u. Chi. Legal f. ,139. Crosby, F.; Bromley, S.; and Saxe, L. 1980. Recent Unob-trusive Studies of Black and White Discrimination and Prej-udice: A Literature Review. Dhamala, J.; Sun, T.; Kumar, V.; Krishna, S.; Pruksachatkun, Y.; Chang, K.-W.; and Gupta, R. 2021. BOLD: Dataset and Metrics for Measuring Biases in Open-Ended Language Generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 862–872. Vir-tual Event Canada: ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-8309-7. Finkelstein, L.; Gabrilovich, E.; Matias, Y.; Rivlin, E.; Solan, Z.; Wolfman, G.; and Ruppin, E. 2001. Placing search in context: The concept revisited. In Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web , 406–414. Gallegos, I. O.; Rossi, R. A.; Barrow, J.; Tanjim, M. M.; Kim, S.; Dernoncourt, F.; Yu, T.; Zhang, R.; and Ahmed, N. K. 2024. Bias and Fairness in Large Language Models: A Survey. Computational Linguistics , 1–83. Gao, L.; Biderman, S.; Black, S.; Golding, L.; Hoppe, T.; Foster, C.; Phang, J.; He, H.; Thite, A.; Nabeshima, N.; et al. 2020. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for lan-guage modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027 .Ghosh, S.; and Caliskan, A. 2023. ChatGPT Perpetu-ates Gender Bias in Machine Translation and Ignores Non-Gendered Pronouns: Findings across Bengali and Five other Low-Resource Languages. 12 Model GPT-2 GPT-2-Large GPT-Neo T5-small 

Task WS-353 (TP1) ρ 0.56 0.63 0.45 0.48 WS-353 (TP2) ρ 0.72 0.68 0.65 0.59 Bellezza (TP1) ρ 0.79 0.88 0.69 0.69 Bellezza (TP2) ρ 0.85 0.84 0.75 0.60 Bellezza (TP1, 5 terms) ρ 0.70 0.80 0.66 0.64 Bellezza (TP2, 5 terms) ρ 0.79 0.86 0.73 0.57 Table 7: Validation tasks for three additional LMs (GPT-2-Large, GPT-Neo, T5-small) in comparison to GPT-2 on two templates (TP1 and TP2). WS-353 shows the correlation (Spearman’s ρ) between RPAM’s computed association and the human-rated association. Bellezza and ANEW show the correlation (Pearson’s ρ) between RPAM’s valence and the human-rated valence scores, respectively, for the corresponding lexica. For GPT-2, GPT-Neo, TP2 shows a higher correlation, and for T5-small, TP1 shows a higher correlation. Goldfarb-Tarrant, S.; Marchant, R.; Sanchez, R. M.; Pandya, M.; and Lopez, A. 2021. Intrinsic Bias Metrics Do Not Cor-relate with Application Bias. ArXiv:2012.15859 [cs]. Goldfarb-Tarrant, S.; Ungless, E.; Balkir, E.; and Blodgett, S. L. 2023. This Prompt is Measuring <MASK >:Evaluating Bias Evaluation in Language Models. ArXiv:2305.12757 [cs]. Gonen, H.; Iyer, S.; Blevins, T.; Smith, N. A.; and Zettle-moyer, L. 2022. Demystifying Prompts in Language Models via Perplexity Estimation. ArXiv:2212.04037 [cs]. Greenwald, A. G.; and Banaji, M. R. 1995. Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psycho-logical Review , 102(1): 4–27. Greenwald, A. G.; McGhee, D. E.; and Schwartz, J. L. K. 1998. Measuring Individual Differences in Implicit Cogni-tion: The Implicit Association Test. Guo, W.; and Caliskan, A. 2021. Detecting Emergent In-tersectional Biases: Contextualized Word Embeddings Con-tain a Distribution of Human-like Biases. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Soci-ety , 122–133. Virtual Event USA: ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-8473-5. Hofmann, V.; Kalluri, P. R.; Jurafsky, D.; and King, S. 2024. AI generates covertly racist decisions about people based on their dialect. Nature , 633(8028): 147–154. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Husse, S.; and Spitz, A. 2022. Mind Your Bias: A Critical Review of Bias Detection Methods for Contextual Language Models. ArXiv:2211.08461 [cs]. Jiang, A. Q.; Sablayrolles, A.; Mensch, A.; Bamford, C.; Chaplot, D. S.; Casas, D. d. l.; Bressand, F.; Lengyel, G.; Lample, G.; Saulnier, L.; Lavaud, L. R.; Lachaux, M.-A.; Stock, P.; Scao, T. L.; Lavril, T.; Wang, T.; Lacroix, T.; and Sayed, W. E. 2023. Mistral 7B. ArXiv:2310.06825 [cs]. Kenthapadi, K.; Sameki, M.; and Taly, A. 2024. Grounding and Evaluation for Large Language Models: Practical Chal-lenges and Lessons Learned (Survey). In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discov-ery and Data Mining , 6523–6533. Barcelona Spain: ACM. ISBN 9798400704901. Kotek, H.; Dockum, R.; and Sun, D. 2023. Gender bias and stereotypes in Large Language Models. In Proceedings of The ACM Collective Intelligence Conference , 12–24. Delft Netherlands: ACM. ISBN 9798400701139. Kurita, K.; Vyas, N.; Pareek, A.; Black, A. W.; and Tsvetkov, Y. 2019. Measuring Bias in Contextualized Word Representations. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing , 166–172. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics. May, C.; Wang, A.; Bordia, S.; Bowman, S. R.; and Rudinger, R. 2019. On Measuring Social Biases in Sen-tence Encoders. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North , 622–628. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics. Nadeem, M.; Bethke, A.; and Reddy, S. 2021. StereoSet: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language mod-els. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Inter-national Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 5356–5371. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics. Nangia, N.; Vania, C.; Bhalerao, R.; and Bowman, S. R. 2020. CrowS-Pairs: A Challenge Dataset for Measuring So-cial Biases in Masked Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 1953–1967. Online: Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Onorati, D.; Ruzzetti, E.; Venditti, D.; Ranaldi, L.; and Zan-zotto, F. 2023. Measuring bias in Instruction-Following models with P-AT. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , 8006–8034. Singa-pore: Association for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. ArXiv:2303.08774 [cs]. Osgood, C. E. 1964. Semantic Differential Technique in the Comparative Study of Cultures 1. American Anthropologist ,66(3): 171–200. Radford, A.; Wu, J.; Child, R.; Luan, D.; Amodei, D.; and Sutskever, I. 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. 13 Raffel, C.; Shazeer, N.; Roberts, A.; Lee, K.; Narang, S.; Matena, M.; Zhou, Y.; Li, W.; and Liu, P. J. 2020. Explor-ing the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research ,21(1): 5485–5551. Rudinger, R.; Naradowsky, J.; Leonard, B.; and Van Durme, B. 2018. Gender Bias in Coreference Resolution. ArXiv:1804.09301 [cs]. Schick, T.; Udupa, S.; and Sch¨ utze, H. 2021. Self-Diagnosis and Self-Debiasing: A Proposal for Reducing Corpus-Based Bias in NLP. ArXiv:2103.00453 [cs]. Socher, R.; Perelygin, A.; Wu, J.; Chuang, J.; Manning, C. D.; Ng, A.; and Potts, C. 2013. Recursive Deep Models for Semantic Compositionality Over a Sentiment Treebank. Steed, R.; Panda, S.; Kobren, A.; and Wick, M. 2022. Up-stream Mitigation Is Not All You Need: Testing the Bias Transfer Hypothesis in Pre-Trained Language Models. In 

Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,3524–3542. Dublin, Ireland: Association for Computational Linguistics. Tan, Y. C.; and Celis, L. E. 2019. Assessing Social and In-tersectional Biases in Contextualized Word Representations. Toney-Wails, A.; and Caliskan, A. 2021. ValNorm Quanti-fies Semantics to Reveal Consistent Valence Biases Across Languages and Over Centuries. ArXiv:2006.03950 [cs]. Wan, Y.; Wang, W.; He, P.; Gu, J.; Bai, H.; and Lyu, M. R. 2023. BiasAsker: Measuring the Bias in Conversational AI System. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 515–527. San Fran-cisco CA USA: ACM. ISBN 9798400703270. Wolf, T.; Debut, L.; Sanh, V.; Chaumond, J.; Delangue, C.; Moi, A.; Cistac, P.; Rault, T.; Louf, R.; Funtowicz, M.; et al. 2019. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771 .Wolfe, R.; and Caliskan, A. 2022. VAST: The Valence-Assessing Semantics Test for Contextualizing Language Models. ArXiv:2203.07504 [cs]. Wolfe, R.; Hiniker, A.; and Howe, B. 2024. ML-EAT: A Multilevel Embedding Association Test for Interpretable and Transparent Social Science. Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , 7(1): 1608–1620. Number: 1. Xu, X.; Li, M.; Tao, C.; Shen, T.; Cheng, R.; Li, J.; Xu, C.; Tao, D.; and Zhou, T. 2024. A Survey on Knowledge Distil-lation of Large Language Models. ArXiv:2402.13116 [cs]. 14