Title: SAP: State-Guided Data Synthesis with Argument Provenance for Multi-Turn Tool Use

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.06124v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 00:46:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# SAP: State-Guided Data Synthesis with Argument Provenance for Multi-Turn Tool Use 

Zichen Tian 1, Jinpeng Chen 1*, Cheng Gong 2, Suiyun Zhang 2, Rui Liu 2†1Independent Researcher 2Huawei Research 

zichentian1024@outlook.com, jinpeng.chen@my.cityu.edu.hk, liu.rui2@huawei.com 

Abstract 

High-quality multi-turn tool-use data is essen-tial for training agentic models, yet existing data synthesis methods often underrepresent the argument-level dependencies that are crit-ical to long-horizon tool use. As a result, even when a model selects the correct tool, task execution may still fail because the model fills tool arguments with fabricated, stale, or weakly grounded values. To address this prob-lem, we propose State-Guided Data Synthe-sis with Argument Provenance (SAP) . SAP combines state guidance, tool-argument prove-nance constraints, and turn-level validation to efficiently construct tool-use trajectories with long-range dependencies and high accuracy. Using data generated by SAP, we build SAP-4B, which is highly competitive even when compared with much larger models across multiple benchmarks. Source code, synthe-sized data, and trained weights are available at https://github.com/Zichen1024/SAP .

1 Introduction 

Tool use is the primary interface through which large language models (LLMs) interact with the real world (Patil et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2024; Barres et al., 2025). As LLMs are deployed in long-horizon agentic systems, multi-turn tool use becomes a key axis of agent capability; yet the complexity of state evolution, tool feedback, and cross-turn dependencies makes high-quality multi-turn trajectories scarce, a major bottleneck for train-ing agentic models (Rabinovich and Anaby-Tavor, 2025; Zhang et al., 2025; Prabhakar et al., 2025). In practice, many multi-turn failures arise not from choosing the wrong tool, but from incor-rectly specified tool arguments (Rabinovich and Anaby-Tavor, 2025). Yet existing data-synthesis work mostly focuses on tool-selection dependen-

> *

Project lead 

> †

Corresponding author. 0123   

> 0.93 1.71
> 2.54
> Mean Chain Len.
> 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5
> 49
> 12
> Max Chain Len.
> 0510 15 20 25
> 6.8 20.5 20.3
> Dep. Args (%)
> ToolACE APIGen-MT SAP (Ours)

Figure 1: Argument-dependency statistics on represen-tative open-source multi-turn tool-use training sets and ours. Mean Chain Len. and Max Chain Len. denote the mean and maximum lengths of argument-value propa-gation chains across turns; Dep. Args (%) denotes the proportion of arguments involved in cross-turn depen-dencies. 

cies: MAGNET (Yin et al., 2025) and FunReason-MT (Xu et al., 2025a), for example, use pre-built tool dependency graphs to ensure tool-sequence validity, while cross-turn dependencies among tool arguments are largely overlooked. Such depen-dencies are ubiquitous; arguments typically come from the initial environment state, prior tool-call returns, or earlier user messages, and when under-represented in training data, the resulting models fabricate upstream references, reuse stale user in-puts, or hallucinate substitutes when an upstream call fails. To quantify this gap, we measure the length of cross-turn argument-value propagation chains and the proportion of arguments involved in such dependencies, and find that existing open-source training datasets (Liu et al., 2024; Prabhakar et al., 2025) are consistently shallow on both, 1 leav-ing models prone to errors in complex multi-turn tasks (Rabinovich and Anaby-Tavor, 2025). Beyond provenance, existing methods also face a hard trade-off between trajectory accuracy and generation cost. Two paradigms currently domi-nate. Intent-First methods (Qin et al., 2024; Prab-hakar et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025b; Zeng et al., 

> 1

Sample sizes for the statistics in Figure 1: ToolACE 11k, APIGen-MT 5k, SAP (Ours) 9k. arXiv:2609.06124v1 [cs.AI] 5 Sep 2026 2026; Chen et al., 2026; Xu et al., 2026b) draft user intents first and expand dialogues and tool calls post hoc; their validation typically combines rule-based blueprint checks (schema, types, exe-cutability) with LLM committee review. Owing to the limited reliability of the underlying LLMs, this validation cannot fully guarantee accuracy, and a single failed check often discards the entire tra-jectory even when it contains locally correct sub-sequences. Trace-First methods (Yin et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025a; Hao et al., 2026) sample exe-cutable trajectories over a tool-dependency graph and derive user-side queries from those traces; this gives strong executability guarantees but couples the graph to the source tool ecosystem, making migration to new domains costly. To address these issues, we propose State-Guided Data Synthesis with Argument Prove-nance (SAP) . Given a toolset and its documenta-tion, SAP dynamically constructs a Finite State Machine (FSM) whose edges already carry per-argument provenance tags; it then samples state-transition trajectories from the FSM and fills tool arguments turn by turn. Arguments that depend on prior context are validated against the executed history, and each tool call is executed immedi-ately after generation. If a call fails, only the of-fending call is retried rather than discarding the trajectory. Once the call sequence is fixed and verified, the framework generates the correspond-ing natural-language user and assistant messages. By combining state-transition guidance, parameter-provenance awareness, and immediate tool-call val-idation, SAP jointly supports executability, causal consistency of arguments, and cross-domain scala-bility, achieving both high quality and efficiency. Using data synthesized by SAP, we train SAP-4B, which achieves competitive results on both BFCL v4 multi-turn (Patil et al., 2025) and τ 2-bench Retail/Airline (Barres et al., 2025). To sup-port future research, the synthesis code, synthe-sized data, and trained weights are publicly avail-able at https://github.com/Zichen1024/SAP .Our main contributions are as follows: • We introduce argument-provenance diagnos-tics for multi-turn tool-use data, showing that existing open-source data contain shallow de-pendency chains and few arguments that de-pend on previous turns, limiting their support for learning long-range argument tracking. • We propose SAP, a state-guided synthesis framework that dynamically builds an FSM from tool documentation, treats argument provenance as an explicit constraint, and vali-dates tool calls turn by turn, enabling the effi-cient construction of multi-turn tool-use data with strong causal dependencies and high cor-rectness. • We show that SAP-4B achieves competitive results on both BFCL v4 multi-turn and τ 2-bench; ablation studies further confirm the importance of each component. 

2 Related Work 

Multi-turn tool-use data synthesis. High-quality multi-turn trajectory synthesis is a prin-cipal bottleneck for tool-augmented LLMs (Patil et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2024; Barres et al., 2025; Prabhakar et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025a; Guan et al., 2025; Hao et al., 2026; Li et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026a; Chai et al., 2026; Su et al., 2026). The intent-first paradigm starts from user intent and expands tool invocations post hoc, instanti-ated as DFS planning over a large API pool (Qin et al., 2024), structured blueprints validated by rule-based checks and LLM committees (Prabhakar et al., 2025), non-autoregressive skeletons with mask-and-fill refinement (Zeng et al., 2026), graph-sampled planned generation for dialogue coher-ence (Wang et al., 2025b), user-side intent mod-eling at scale (Cho et al., 2026), scaling tool-use synthesis from real-world MCP environments (Xu et al., 2025b), or distillation of implicit tool-use intents from raw text (Xu et al., 2026b). The trace-first paradigm samples executable traces over a tool dependency graph (hand-curated, signature-derived, or execution-evolved) and derives user queries conditioned on those traces (Yin et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025a; Hao et al., 2026; Tian et al., 2026). A recent line of provenance-aware plan-ning , exemplified by ToolWeave (Khandelwal et al., 2026), constructs tools with built-in dependencies and tracks parameter provenance at plan time to reduce argument hallucination. In contrast, SAP extends the type system to five categories ( Pi, Po, Pc, Pu, plus the runtime-only 

Pf ) and requires every declared source to be re-solved against the executor state prior to binding, with no pre-built or evolved dependency graph, enforcing argument-level causal consistency at syn-thesis time rather than post hoc. Along a similar line, ToolMind (Yang et al., 2025b) applies per-turn filtering after generation to catch errors that propa-gate across turns, whereas SAP lifts the check from a post-hoc filter into a synthesis-time constraint. InfTool (Li et al., 2025) co-evolves synthesized data and the trained model via outer-loop GRPO, whereas SAP keeps the executor loop within a sin-gle synthesis pass and produces fixed SFT data. 

Multi-turn tool-use benchmarks. Several benchmarks target multi-turn tool use. BFCL v4 (Patil et al., 2025) is among the most widely adopted; its multi-turn track is partitioned into base, long-context, miss-param, and miss-func subsets that probe distinct capabilities. The τ -bench family (Yao et al., 2024; Barres et al., 2025) constructs state-aware Retail/Airline dialogues, requiring the agent to maintain a coherent world state under an LLM-simulated user over long horizons. ToolDial (Shim et al., 2025) and Dialog-Tool (Wang et al., 2025a) provide complementary multi-turn / stateful tool-use datasets. Rabinovich and Anaby-Tavor (2025) expose the fragility of function calling under distribution shift, and Zhang et al. (2025) survey multi-turn LLM interactions more broadly. 

3 Preliminaries 

3.1 Task Definition 

We formalize multi-turn tool-use data synthesis as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) , defined by the tuple M =(S, A, O, T ), where S is the latent environment state space (the world state of the tool-execution environment, e.g., database contents or session con-text); A = Atool ∪ Aresp is the action space, with 

Atool covering tool invocations and Aresp covering natural-language responses; O is the observation space, comprising tool returns r ∈ R and user messages u; and T (st+1 | st, a t) is the stochastic transition function, realized by a grounded execu-tor ε. A trajectory τ = [( o1, a 1), . . . , (oT , a T )] 

records the full sequence of observation-action pairs. Because the agent cannot directly read the latent environment state s, it must ground argu-ments on c0 (accessed indirectly through read-only tool returns or values relayed via user messages), prior tool-call returns r, or earlier user messages 

u. The synthesis goal is to produce a dataset 

D = {(c(i)0 , U (i), GT (i))}i, where U (i) = ( u(i) 

> k

)k

is the per-turn user-message sequence, such that ev-ery argument value v carries an explicitly declared, executor-verifiable causal source. 

3.2 FSM Definition 

While the POMDP above captures the full envi-ronment dynamics (tool-execution state, returns, user messages), the FSM abstracts over it at the dialogue-phase level: each FSM state represents a recognizable phase of the interaction rather than a concrete environment configuration. SAP models this high-level dialogue structure as a Finite State Machine (FSM) :

F = (Σ , σ 0, Σf , ∆) , (1) where Σ is a set of dialogue-phase states, each instantiating one type of a predefined, domain-agnostic state-type taxonomy (Appendix A.1), 

σ0 ∈ Σ the initial state, Σf ⊆ Σ the set of ac-cepting terminal states, and ∆ the set of directed transition edges. The taxonomy is fixed across do-mains, while the concrete states and edges of F are generated per toolset at synthesis time. 

States. Each σ ∈ Σ describes a phase of the user– agent interaction, rather than a tool-level execution dependency. For instance, Σ includes: σinit (ses-sion opened), σlogged_in (user authenticated) and 

σsearch_done (search results retrieved). 

Edges. Each edge δ = ( σ, Cδ, σ ′, Tδ) ∈ ∆ en-codes one dialogue turn: Cδ = [ t1, . . . , t m] is the ordered tool list, and Tδ is a Provenance Tag map that assigns to every argument a declared causal source from the type system of §3.3. The first edge 

δ0 (from σ0) may only declare Pi or Pc sources, since no prior turns exist to reference. 

Extensibility. Unlike trace-first methods that rely on a hand-curated or signature-derived tool-dependency graph, the FSM here is constructed by AFSM at synthesis time by matching each tool in the documentation to the predefined dialogue-phase state types it transitions between, without manually specifying pairwise tool dependencies; a new toolset simply triggers automatic rebuilding from its updated documentation. 

3.3 Provenance Tag Type System 

For every argument p in a tool call, its causal source satisfies: 

src( p) ∈{Pi, P o(k′, j ′, f ′), P c, P u(k′′ ), P f (s0)}. (2) Figure 2: Overview of the SAP pipeline. From left to right, AFSM constructs an FSM from tool documentation and sampled initial states, and the pipeline samples a state trajectory from it. Aplan fills the tagged calls Tool(tag) with concrete parameters, yielding Tool( p), and executes them with ε, using environment rollback and local retry on failure. Finally, Amsg synthesizes the messages for the validated trajectory, which is filtered into the final data. Each argument is assigned a provenance source from {Pi, P o, P c, P u, P f }.

Table 1 summarizes the semantics. The four design-time types form Sdecl = {Pi, P o, P c, P u}, which 

AFSM declares for each turn; Pf is excluded from 

Sdecl and is produced only by Aplan at runtime when a declared source s0 ∈ { Pi, P o, P u} turns out to be unusable. The planner then recovers the argument from another available initial-state value ( Pi) or a newly introduced user-side value ( Pc) when permit-ted. The resulting call is executor-validated after binding. In all cases, the original declared source 

s0 is preserved in fallback_from . The Pf rate probes how faithfully Aplan honors the declared sources; see App. B.2. 

3.4 Argument Dependency Graph 

Given a trajectory, we build a directed graph G =(V, E ) over its tool-call arguments. Each node 

v ∈ V is one argument-slot binding, a parame-ter consumed by some tool call at some turn. An edge (u, v ) ∈ E means that v’s bound value is reused from an earlier occurrence u of the same 

value instance, where u is the upstream source of that value (which may be a field of a prior tool-call return, or a value the user first supplied in an earlier user message). For each argument v ∈ V , let turn( v) be the turn in which v is consumed and origin( v) be the turn in which the value carried by v first entered                                            

> Sym. Type Semantics
> Piinitial_state A field of c0; since the assistant can-not read c0directly, the value enters turn keither from the user message or from a same-turn read-only call.
> Poprev_output Field f′of the j′-th call at a prior executed turn k′< k (all of
> k′, j ′, f ′are bound at runtime by
> Aplan ;AFSM only declares the tag).
> Pcself_create New user-side value introduced at this turn; later surfaced in uk.
> Puprev_user_msg Value semantically introduced in
> uk′′ for some k′′ < k ; dialogue gen-erated retroactively.
> Pffallback Runtime fallback when a declared source s0∈ { Pi, P o, P u}cannot be used: no matching field of c0,no matching prior return, or no us-able anchor value. The planner re-covers the argument from another available Pivalue or from a new Pc
> value when permitted; the resulting call is executor-validated after bind-ing, and the original source s0is kept in fallback_from .

Table 1: Provenance Tag categories. Pi through Pu are declarable by AFSM at design time; Pf is produced only by Aplan at runtime. Parametrized forms ( Po(k′, j ′, f ′),

Pu(k′′ ), Pf (s0)) are used only in the definition of §3.3. 

the dialogue (via a user message or an earlier tool return). Initial-state values enter the dialogue in the turn that consumes them, so for them origin( v) = turn( v). The chain length of v, the mean chain length, and the longest chain over the trajectory are 

L(v) = turn( v) − origin( v),

¯L = 1 

> |V|

X

> v∈V

L(v), L⋆ = max  

> v∈V

L(v), (3) i.e., L(v) counts how many turn boundaries the value crosses before reaching its consumption point. For example, an argument consumed at turn 3 whose value was first introduced at turn 1 has 

L = 2 . We call v a dependent argument when 

L(v) ≥ 1; in provenance-tag terms (§3.3), ar-guments with Pi, Pc, or Pf sources always have 

L(v) = 0 (their value is introduced in the consum-ing turn itself), while Po and Pu are the two sources of cross-turn dependencies. The fraction of depen-dent arguments in V is a breadth-style measure of cross-turn grounding, complementary to chain length. 

4 Method 

4.1 Overview 

SAP casts multi-turn tool-use data synthesis as a closed loop in which three specialized LLM agents cooperate with one executor (Figure 2). AFSM 

synthesizes a provenance-annotated FSM tool-call skeleton from the raw tool documentation. Aplan 

then fills, for each call, the executor-bound argu-ments θexec and per-argument provenance metadata 

θprov , dispatches the call to ε, and groups same-turn calls into parallel step groups. After the call se-quence is verified, Amsg synthesizes the trajectory’s textual messages. The pipeline enforces a Prove-nance Invariant : before any argument value v is committed, its causal source src( v) must be explic-itly declared, and for the three upstream-grounded types ( Pi, Po, Pu) the referenced upstream must exist or be pre-registered at synthesis time. The two ungrounded types ( Pc, Pf ) are still logged in θprov so every value remains evaluable. This shifts cross-turn argument dependencies from a passively emerging side-effect into an explicitly planned property validated turn by turn. 

4.2 AFSM : FSM Skeleton Synthesis 

AFSM synthesizes the FSM F of §3.2 from the summarized tool documentation eT for the tool set 

T and the initial-state summary ec0. For each edge 

δ, it commits an ordered tool list Cδ = [ t1, . . . , t m]

for the corresponding turn and a Provenance Tag map Tδ assigning every required argument a tag from Sdecl (Table 1). A lightweight verifier Vspec 

runs structural checks on the output and triggers regeneration (Appendix A.2). 

4.3 Aplan + ε: Tool-Call Planning and Execution 

Aplan takes the skeleton F and a sampled path 

π = ( δ0, . . . , δ N −1), obtained by a weighted ran-dom walk over F from σ0 to some σf ∈ Σf (tran-sition weights and long-tail emphasis detailed in Appendices A.1, A.2), and converts it into an ex-ecutable call sequence carried out by ε. For each turn, Aplan inspects the executed history H<k and the declared tags, binds a value for each call, and groups intra-turn calls into parallel step groups (no intra-group Po edges). ε then executes group by group; on failure, only the offending call is regen-erated and retried (Appendices A.3 and A.4). Two tag types require runtime binding. For Po,

AFSM only declares that some prior return is reused; 

Aplan binds the specific field at runtime against the actual return of ε. If no declared upstream satisfies the binding, it records Pf and recovers the argu-ment from another available Pi value or from a new Pc value when permitted; a declared Pi source that cannot be located in c0 falls back the same way. The executor validates the resulting call after the recovery value is bound (see App. A.3). This both surfaces the mismatch as a diagnostic signal in θprov (§6) and prevents a single binding failure from invalidating an entire trajectory. For Pu, the value must appear in an earlier user message that 

Amsg has yet to generate; we break this cycle by fixing the value at planning time (via a temporary 

Pc remap) and registering it together with a sched-uled anchor turn k⋆ in a virtual history ∆v, which 

Amsg later renders into uk⋆ (Appendix A.5). 

4.4 Amsg : Post-hoc Synthesis of Dialogue Text Messages 

Once all (ti, θexec  

> i

, r i), θprov  

> i

and ∆v are frozen, 

Amsg synthesizes the user message uk for every turn and an assistant natural-language response when Ck = ∅. Because messages are written only after the ground truth is fixed, every message is grounded against actual returns. The user message 

uk is driven by a must-mention list derived from 

θprov  

> i

and ∆v[k], with two regimes: newly intro-duced values ( Pc, Pf , the anchor side of a future 

Pu consumer, and Pi values that must be passed verbatim to a tool) appear as explicit literals in uk;

referenced values ( Po and the consumer side of Pu)appear via vague referents whose unambiguity is verified by the validator. Full marker semantics and prompt-level constraints are in Appendix A.6. 

4.5 Challenge Scenario Injection and Multi-Layer Validation 

For each validated base trajectory, two rewrite op-erators synthesize hard variants targeting common deployment failure modes. Ψparam (MissParam) samples a few Pc arguments from an originating turn k∗, replaces their literals in uk∗ with vague references, and clears the turn-k∗ ground truth so that the assistant emits a clarification; an inserted reveal turn then re-supplies the missing values and re-binds the call. Ψfunc (MissFunc) temporarily removes a tool that the base actually invokes and re-exposes it at the next turn via a user-side handoff message. Both operators are guarded by an execu-tor replay that requires the rewritten outcome to match the original base (Appendix A.7). Before being persisted, every trajectory passes through two complementary checks: a code-side deterministic check (legal provenance references, closed ∆v, minimum length), and an agent-side LLM judge checking intent alignment and rewrite-scenario structural compliance. Rejection by either check triggers immediate discard. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Setup Backbone and baselines. We SFT on Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (Yang et al., 2025a). The directly comparable open-source BFCL v4 multi-turn base-lines at the 4B / 8B scale include AWM (Wang et al., 2026), CM2 (Zhang et al., 2026a), ToolACE-2 and BitAgent (Zhang et al., 2026b), and TOU-CAN (Xu et al., 2025b); we additionally report BFCL v3 multi-turn numbers for MAGNET (Yin et al., 2025), ToolWeave (Khandelwal et al., 2026), and MUA-RL (Zhao et al., 2025) as reference (listed in a separate row group in Table 2; not di-rectly comparable due to benchmark version drift). 

Synthesis pipeline. The three agents are instan-tiated as AFSM = Gemini-3.1 Pro (Google Deep-Mind, 2026), Aplan = Gemini-3 Pro (Google Deep-Mind, 2025), and Amsg = Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 (Yang et al., 2025a), chosen to bal-ance FSM-source compliance and dialogue-style diversity (see App. B.2). Gemini-3.1 Pro attains the lowest fallback rate as the planner (2.02% vs. 2.76%, App. B.2), but its endpoint was less sta-ble under high request concurrency; since a single FSM skeleton is amortized over several sampled trajectories while Aplan accounts for the bulk of the pipeline’s request volume, we assign Gemini-3.1 Pro to the low-throughput FSM stage and Gemini-3 Pro to the high-throughput planning stage. The executor ε wraps the original BFCL v4 multi-turn and τ 2-bench backends without modification, so every synthesized trajectory is grounded against the same simulator used at evaluation. The initial configurations consumed at synthesis time are self-generated (following the released schemas) rather than taken from the benchmark test data, which is used only for evaluation. A single pipeline con-figuration is used across all source domains: only the tool documentation and the executor backend are swapped per domain, while AFSM , Aplan , Amsg ,the FSM state-type taxonomy, and the Provenance Tag system remain identical. The released SFT mix contains ≈ 9k trajectories. 

Training. We train with the verl frame-work (Sheng et al., 2025) on a single node equipped with eight 80GB GPUs. All experiments use full-parameter SFT with AdamW: learning rate 

1×10 −6, global batch size 128 , and 10 epochs. 

Benchmarks and metrics. BFCL v4 multi-turn (Base / MissFunc / MissParam / LongCtx) is scored with the official BFCL harness under the official environments and test data; we report the harness’s multi-turn accuracy, which combines state-based checks on the executed environment with response-based checks on the emitted call sequence. τ 2-bench Retail / Airline (Barres et al., 2025) is evalu-ated under the official harness with the think tool disabled; we report pass 1 only. The argument-value chain-length diagnostics ¯L and L⋆ (§3) are reported as a synthesis-side measurement in Fig. 1. 

5.2 Main Results 

Over the Qwen3-4B-Instruct backbone, SAP-4B SFT improves BFCL v4 multi-turn Avg by +8.3 (22.1 → 30.4) and τ 2-bench Avg by +2.9 (32.2 

→ 35.1) without any RL. On BFCL v4 the gains concentrate on Base (+11.5), LongCtx (+10.5), and MissParam (+9.0), while MissFunc shows a smaller lift (+2.0). The τ 2-bench improvement (Retail +1.7 / Airline +4.0) is more modest, con-sistent with the benchmark’s long-horizon state-tracking demands; SAP-4B’s competitive τ 2 result under a 4B SFT-only setup indicates that argument-BFCL v4 Multi-Turn τ 2-bench (pass 1)Model Size Avg Base MFn MPm LCtx Retail Airline Avg 

Closed-source / large-scale reference (BFCL v4) 

GPT-5.2-High – 48.5 – – – – 81.6 62.5 72.1 Claude Sonnet 4.5 – 61.4 69.0 65.0 52.5 59.0 86.2 70.1 78.2 Gemini-3 Pro – 60.8 64.5 60.0 54.5 64.0 85.3 72.7 79.0 DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp 685B 37.4 41.5 39.5 33.5 35.0 – – –Qwen3-235B-A22B 235B 45.4 – – – – 71.9 45.6 58.8 

BFCL v3 MT (reference) 

ToolWeave-8B 8B 21.1 28.0 18.0 18.5 20.0 – – –MAGNET-7B-SFT 7B 26.5 35.5 24.0 27.5 19.0 – – –MAGNET-7B-mDPO 7B 27.8 39.0 24.0 26.0 22.0 – – –MAGNET-14B-SFT 14B 33.4 47.0 32.0 32.0 22.5 – – –MAGNET-14B-mDPO 14B 37.9 52.0 36.0 35.5 28.0 – – –MUA-RL-8B 8B 14.6 21.0 11.5 15.0 11.0 49.8 19.0 34.4 MUA-RL-14B 14B 25.3 40.5 14.0 25.0 21.5 66.0 38.0 52.0 MUA-RL-32B 32B 28.4 42.0 20.0 30.0 21.5 67.3 45.4 56.4 

BFCL v4 MT (directly comparable) 

CM2-8B-RL 8B 36.5 44.5 32.0 35.0 34.5 36.4 27.0 31.7 CM2-8B-SFT 8B 26.8 30.0 27.5 24.5 25.0 19.5 23.5 21.5 ToolACE-2-8B 8B 37.0 47.0 31.0 28.0 42.0 8.2 26.7 17.5 BitAgent-8B 8B 37.8 46.5 37.5 24.0 43.0 6.1 37.3 21.7 TOUCAN-7B 7B 24.0 30.0 21.0 24.0 21.0 22.8 20.0 21.4 AWM-4B 4B 30.3 37.5 35.5 28.5 19.5 30.3 19.0 24.7 AWM-8B 8B 40.1 49.5 48.0 36.0 27.0 41.2 33.5 37.4 Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 4B 22.1 26.5 21.0 15.5 25.5 40.4 24.0 32.2 

SAP-4B SFT (ours) 4B 30.4 38.0 23.0 24.5 36.0 42.1 28.0 35.1 

∆ (Ours − backbone) +8.3 +11.5 +2.0 +9.0 +10.5 +1.7 +4.0 +2.9 

Table 2: Main results on BFCL v4 Multi-Turn and τ 2-bench. MFn, MPm, and LCtx denote MissFunc, MissParam, and LongCtx, respectively; Retail and Airline are the two τ 2-bench domains. Row groups separate BFCL v4 (directly comparable) from BFCL v3 (reference). Sources: GPT-5.2 (OpenAI, 2025), Claude Sonnet 4.5 (Anthropic, 2025), Gemini-3 Pro (Google DeepMind, 2025), DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), Qwen3-235B-A22B and backbone (Yang et al., 2025a); ToolWeave (Khandelwal et al., 2026), MAGNET (Yin et al., 2025), MUA-RL (Zhao et al., 2025); ToolACE-2 / BitAgent results from (Zhang et al., 2026b), CM2 (Zhang et al., 2026a), TOUCAN (Xu et al., 2025b), AWM (Wang et al., 2026). 

level provenance provides a meaningful signal even at this small scale. As a complementary out-of-distribution probe, we evaluate SAP-4B on the BFCL v4 single-turn track (Appendix B.4): multi-turn-only training does not regress single-turn per-formance and yields a small consistent lift on both Non-live and Live splits. Among methods evaluated on the same BFCL v4 MT release, SAP-4B is on par with same-parameter-scale baselines on BFCL v4 MT Avg (30.4 vs. AWM-4B 30.3) while substantially out-performing them on τ 2-bench (35.1 vs. AWM-4B 24.7), where long-horizon state-tracking is the bot-tleneck. SAP-4B still trails 8B baselines on BFCL v4, but on τ 2 it matches or exceeds most of them (CM2-8B-RL 31.7, ToolACE-2-8B 17.5, BitAgent-8B 21.7) despite using only SFT on a 4B backbone with 9k trajectories. We attribute the BFCL v4 gap primarily to scale rather than data quality. The closed-source frontier (Claude Sonnet 4.5, Gemini-3 Pro) reaches BFCL v4 MT Avg in the 60s and τ 2 Avg in the 70s, indicating that the open-source 4B regime still has substantial headroom on BFCL v4 multi-turn. Notably, GPT-5.2-High shows a wider gap to the Claude/Gemini frontier on BFCL v4 MT (48.5 vs. ∼60) than on τ 2 (72.1 vs. ∼78), suggesting the two benchmarks exercise partly orthogonal capabilities. 

5.3 Ablations Note on AFSM and pipeline-level ablations. We do not include an AFSM ablation row in Table 3: Variant Avg Base MFn MPm LCtx SAP-4B (Full) 30.4 38.0 23.0 24.5 36.0              

> A1: w/o Prov. Tag 24.0 29.5 19.5 21.5 25.5 A2: w/o Ψ28.8 37.0 21.0 22.5 34.5
> Table 3: Ablation on BFCL v4 Multi-Turn at matched data scale. A1 removes per-argument Provenance Tag declarations; A2 removes both rewrite operators
> Ψparam ,Ψfunc .

removing the FSM skeleton (i.e., reverting to free-form turn-by-turn generation by Aplan ) cuts the pipeline’s data pass-rate from 89% to 50% (see Appendix B.3), and the surviving trajectories are too few and too biased to support a fair SFT com-parison. Similarly, disabling per-call retry (the “noRetry” variant) drops the pass-rate to 54% . Re-moving Provenance Tags while keeping the FSM (“FSM+noTag”) yields a high pass-rate ( 92% ) but produces zero Po arguments, confirming that the tag declarations are the primary mechanism driving cross-turn dependency generation. We treat AFSM 

as a non-optional structural component and report only the two downstream ablations below. 

A1: Provenance Tag declarations. Removing the per-argument Provenance Tag declarations that AFSM commits in Tδ (§4.2) and letting Aplan 

choose argument sources freely causes a substan-tial drop across all four subsets (Avg 30 .4 → 24 .0,

−6.4). The hit is sharpest on LongCtx ( −10 .5)and Base ( −8.5), with MissFunc ( −3.5) and Miss-Param ( −3.0) showing moderate declines, confirm-ing that the tag declarations act as a structural prior that constrains Aplan to ground each argu-ment in a verifiable upstream, most useful pre-cisely where long-horizon argument tracking mat-ters. App. B.2 reports a complementary backbone-level study where the Pf rate correlates with these declaration-compliance failures. 

A2: Rewrite operators Ψparam , Ψfunc . Remov-ing the rewrite operators Ψparam and Ψfunc (§4.5) at matched data scale lowers Avg to 28 .8 (−1.6). The effect is modest but consistent across Miss-Func ( −2.0), MissParam ( −2.0), Base ( −1.0), and LongCtx ( −1.5), matching the expectation that the operators specifically target deployment fail-ure modes while leaving standard multi-turn per-formance largely intact. The smaller magnitude relative to A1 also indicates that the bulk of the gain comes from the structural Provenance Tag con-straint, not from the hard-scenario rewrites alone. 

5.4 Case Study 

Figure 3 provides qualitative evidence for SAP’s provenance constraints and execution-in-the-loop validation. In (a), full SAP resolves the cp source 

routes.js as Po from the earlier ls return; val-idation confirms the copy, so the backup can be read on the next turn. Without turn-level validation, a one-character error ( route.js ) causes the copy and the subsequent cat call to fail. In (b), when the initial search provides no usable recipient, SAP records Pf , recovers USR005 from the initial state, and validates the send successfully. Disabling fall-back leaves USR009 ungrounded and nonexistent, causing both message delivery and subsequent ver-ification to fail. 

6 Discussion 

SAP does not fully prevent argument hallucina-tions at newly created values ( Pc) or at fallback recoveries that must introduce a new value. When a declared upstream is unavailable, Pf instead records the recovery event and its original source, whether the recovered binding selects another avail-able value or introduces a new one; the resulting call is then checked by the executor. This localizes unresolved argument quality to a single call and makes every recovery auditable in θprov . Hallucina-tions cannot propagate along Po (blocked by real execution) or Pu (blocked by the §4.4 consistency check). This contrasts with committee-style valida-tors that reduce hallucination probability without bounding its propagation scope. We train on ≈9k trajectories with SFT only, no RL, a deliberately compact setup imposed by the per-trajectory live-executor cost (§7) and our com-pute budget. Under this small-model, small-data, SFT-only setting, SAP-4B still matches or exceeds several 8B RL-trained methods on τ 2-bench, par-ticularly where long-horizon state-tracking aligns with our provenance design. That this holds with-out scale or RL confounders gives a clean lower-bound estimate of the method’s intrinsic data-quality contribution. Most open-source 4B baselines (e.g., AWM-4B) are think-mode RL-trained models with long delib-eration chains before each tool call. SAP-4B trains from a non-think backbone (Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507) with SFT only, so its per-turn inference cost is substantially lower at comparable or better τ 2-bench accuracy. Figure 3: Case study of SAP’s error localization and hybrid validation. (a) Turn-level execution validation prevents an incorrect file binding from cascading to a later call. (b) Parameter fallback recovers a valid recipient and is checked by the executor, whereas disabling it causes message delivery to fail. 

7 Conclusion 

We presented SAP, a state-guided pipeline for multi-turn tool-use trajectory synthesis that pro-motes argument provenance from a post-hoc an-notation to a synthesis-time active constraint. In addition, SAP is domain-agnostic: rebuilding the FSM from updated tool documentation and swap-ping the executor backend is sufficient to support new toolsets, with no manual rule engineering. The mechanism rests on two components: (i) the Provenance Tag type system, which explicitly de-clares the causal source of every argument; and (ii) FSM-driven structure-first generation, which dynamically builds a provenance-annotated skele-ton from tool documentation and enforces per-turn executability via execution-in-the-loop validation. Experiments and ablations on BFCL v4 multi-turn and τ 2-bench validate the design. The framework opens two directions. (i) SAP as a compiler for agentic RL. Provenance Tag serves as a process-reward interface: successful Po re-trievals are positive signals, and argument-binding mismatches localize provenance errors, supporting an SFT cold-start → RL with process rewards cur-riculum without extra annotation, since the signals are written into θprov at synthesis time. (ii) Scaling and pipeline extensions. Data scaling, larger back-bones, RL, execution-conditioned FSMs that revise the skeleton when turns fail, and depth-guided syn-thesis that uses the dependency-graph diagnostic as an optimization objective. 

Limitations 

We train SAP only on a 4B backbone; the 8B-and-larger numbers in Table 2 are quoted from the original papers, as most concurrent data-synthesis works (FunReason-MT, MAGNET, ToolWeave) re-lease no full pipeline. Methodologically, AFSM 

drafts the skeleton in one pass, so dependencies that surface only after partial execution (e.g., return-code-conditioned branches) are downgraded to Pf

at runtime instead of a grounded Po edge; Prove-nance Tag covers tool-call arguments only, not en-tity anaphora in free text; and all runs use English documentation in single-agent settings. Following standard practice, the data-synthesis pipeline reuses the BFCL and τ 2-bench schemas and executor backends as its environment, though initial states, user messages, and call sequences are sampled independently rather than copied from the test split. Two costs remain: live-executor val-idation is expensive in wall-clock and API terms (App. B.1), and we do not report human-agreement statistics for the single LLM judge of §4.5. 

AI Use Statement 

In line with the ACL Policy on AI Writing Assis-tance, large language models were used as writing aids for grammar polishing, paragraph restructur-ing, and literature search, and for code completion when implementing the synthesis pipeline. All ex-perimental design, methodological contributions, hypothesis formulations, error analyses, and final claims are the authors’ work; no content was gen-erated end-to-end by AI without subsequent verifi-cation and editing. 

References 

Anthropic. 2025. Introducing Claude Sonnet 4.5. An-thropic news release. Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2025. τ 2-Bench: Evaluat-ing conversational agents in a dual-control environ-ment. Preprint , arXiv:2506.07982. Yuxiang Chai, Han Xiao, Xinyu Fu, Jinpeng Chen, Rui Liu, and Hongsheng Li. 2026. UI-KOBE: Knowledge-oriented behavior exploration for lightweight graph-guided gui agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2605.29534. Jinpeng Chen, Cheng Gong, Hanbo Li, Ziru Liu, Zichen Tian, Xinyu Fu, Shi Wu, Chenyang Zhang, Wu Zhang, Suiyun Zhang, Dandan Tu, and Rui Liu. 2026. CoVe: Training interactive tool-use agents via constraint-guided verification. Preprint ,arXiv:2603.01940. Jungho Cho, Minbyul Jeong, and Sungrae Park. 2026. User-oriented multi-turn dialogue generation with tool use at scale. Preprint , arXiv:2601.08225. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chen-hao Xu, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, De-jian Yang, and 245 others. 2025. DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2512.02556. Google DeepMind. 2025. Gemini 3 Pro. Google Deep-Mind model page. Google DeepMind. 2026. Gemini 3.1 Pro model card. Google DeepMind model card. Ziyi Guan, Jason Chun Lok Li, Zhijian Hou, Ping-ping Zhang, Donglai Xu, Yuzhi Zhao, Mengyang Wu, Jinpeng Chen, Thanh-Toan Nguyen, Pengfei Xian, Wenao Ma, Shengchao Qin, Graziano Chesi, and Ngai Wong. 2025. KG-RAG: Enhancing gui agent decision-making via knowledge graph-driven retrieval-augmented generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.00366. Bingguang Hao, Zengzhuang Xu, Yuntao Wen, Xinyi Xu, Yang Liu, Tong Zhao, Maolin Wang, Long Chen, Dong Wang, Yicheng Chen, Cunyin Peng, Xiangyu Zhao, Chenyi Zhuang, and Ji Zhang. 2026. From failure to mastery: Generating hard samples for tool-use agents. Preprint , arXiv:2601.01498. Dinesh Khandelwal, Gnana Prakash Punnavajhala, G P Shrivatsa Bhargav, Gaurav Pandey, Sachin-dra Joshi, Hima Karanam, and Dinesh Raghu. 2026. ToolWeave: Structured synthesis of com-plex multi-turn tool-calling dialogues. Preprint ,arXiv:2605.12521. Yuwen Li, Wei Zhang, Zelong Huang, Mason Yang, Jiajun Wu, Shawn Guo, Huahao Hu, Lingyi Sun, Jian Yang, Mingjie Tang, and Byran Dai. 2025. Close the loop: Synthesizing infinite tool-use data via multi-agent role-playing. Preprint , arXiv:2512.23611. Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, Xinlong Hao, Shuai Yu, Dexun Li, Shuai Wang, Weinan Gan, Zhengying Liu, Yuanqing Yu, Zezhong Wang, Yux-ian Wang, Wu Ning, Yutai Hou, Bin Wang, Chuhan Wu, Xinzhi Wang, Yong Liu, Yasheng Wang, and 8 others. 2024. ToolACE: Winning the points of LLM function calling. Preprint , arXiv:2409.00920. OpenAI. 2025. OpenAI Update to GPT-5 System Card: GPT-5.2. OpenAI system card update. Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Fanjia Yan, Char-lie Cheng-Jie Ji, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2025. The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From tool use to agen-tic evaluation of large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 48371–48392. PMLR. Akshara Prabhakar, Zuxin Liu, Ming Zhu, Jianguo Zhang, Tulika Awalgaonkar, Shiyu Wang, Zhiwei Liu, Haolin Chen, Thai Hoang, Juan Carlos Niebles, Shelby Heinecke, Weiran Yao, Huan Wang, Sil-vio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2025. APIGen-MT: Agentic pipeline for multi-turn data genera-tion via simulated agent-human interplay. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.03601. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world APIs. In Proceedings of the 12th Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . Spotlight; arXiv:2307.16789. Ella Rabinovich and Ateret Anaby-Tavor. 2025. On the robustness of agentic function calling. In Pro-ceedings of the 5th Workshop on Trustworthy NLP (TrustNLP 2025) , pages 298–304. Association for Computational Linguistics. Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. 2025. HybridFlow: A flexible and efficient RLHF framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys) .Jeonghoon Shim, Gyuhyeon Seo, Cheongsu Lim, and Yohan Jo. 2025. ToolDial: Multi-turn dialogue gen-eration method for tool-augmented language models. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Con-ference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Junhao Su, Yuanliang Wan, Junwei Yang, Hengyu Shi, Tianyang Han, Yurui Qiu, and Junfeng Luo. 2026. Failure makes the agent stronger: Enhancing accu-racy through structured reflection for reliable tool in-teractions. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 12712–12734, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiaoyu Tian, Haotian Wang, Shuaiting Chen, Hao Zhou, Kaichi Yu, Yudian Zhang, Jade Ouyang, Junxi Yin, Jiong Chen, Baoyan Guo, Lei Zhang, Junjie Tao, Yuansheng Song, Ming Cui, and Chengwei Liu. 2026. ASTRA: Automated synthesis of agen-tic trajectories and reinforcement arenas. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.21558. Hongru Wang, Wenyu Huang, Yufei Wang, Yuanhao Xi, Jianqiao Lu, Huan Zhang, Nan Hu, Zeming Liu, Jeff Z. Pan, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2025a. Rethinking stateful tool use in multi-turn dialogues: Benchmarks and challenges. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 .Zezhong Wang, Xingshan Zeng, Weiwen Liu, Liangyou Li, Yasheng Wang, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Qun Liu, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2025b. ToolFlow: Boost-ing LLM tool-calling through natural and coherent dialogue synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (NAACL) .Zhaoyang Wang, Canwen Xu, Boyi Liu, Yite Wang, Siwei Han, Zhewei Yao, Huaxiu Yao, and Yuxiong He. 2026. Agent World Model: Infinity synthetic environments for agentic reinforcement learning. In 

Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 306 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research . PMLR. Siyuan Xu, Shiyang Li, Xin Liu, Tianyi Liu, Yix-iao Li, Zhan Shi, Zixuan Zhang, Zilong Wang, Qingyu Yin, Jianshu Chen, Tuo Zhao, and Bing Yin. 2026a. Controllable and verifiable tool-use data syn-thesis for agentic reinforcement learning. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.09813. Zengzhuang Xu, Bingguang Hao, Zechuan Wang, Yun-tao Wen, Xinyi Xu, Yang Liu, Long Chen, Dong Wang, Maolin Wang, Tong Zhao, Yicheng Chen, Cunyin Peng, Jinjie Gu, Leilei Gan, Xiangyu Zhao, Chenyi Zhuang, and Shi Gu. 2025a. FunReason-MT technical report: Advanced data synthesis so-lution for real-world multi-turn tool-use. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.24645. Zhangchen Xu, Adriana Meza Soria, Shawn Tan, Anurag Roy, Ashish Sunil Agrawal, Radha Pooven-dran, and Rameswar Panda. 2025b. TOUCAN: Syn-thesizing 1.5M tool-agentic data from real-world MCP environments. Preprint , arXiv:2510.01179. Zhihao Xu, Rumei Li, Jiahuan Li, Rongxiang Weng, Jin-gang Wang, Xunliang Cai, and Xiting Wang. 2026b. Unlocking implicit experience: Synthesizing tool-use trajectories from text. Preprint , arXiv:2601.10355. Method name: GEM. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025a. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Chen Yang, Ran Le, Yun Xing, Zhenwei An, Zongchao Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Yang Song, and Tao Zhang. 2025b. ToolMind technical report: A large-scale, reasoning-enhanced tool-use dataset. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.15718. Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. τ -bench: A benchmark for Tool-Agent-User interaction in real-world domains. 

Preprint , arXiv:2406.12045. Fan Yin, Zifeng Wang, I-Hung Hsu, Jun Yan, Ke Jiang, Yanfei Chen, Jindong Gu, Long T. Le, Kai-Wei Chang, Chen-Yu Lee, Hamid Palangi, and Tomas Pfister. 2025. Magnet: Multi-turn tool-use data syn-thesis and distillation via graph translation. In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 32600–32616. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Xingshan Zeng, Weiwen Liu, Lingzhi Wang, Liangyou Li, Fei Mi, Yasheng Wang, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu. 2026. ToolACE-MT: Non-autoregressive generation for agentic multi-turn in-teraction. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .ArXiv:2508.12685. Chen Zhang, Xinyi Dai, Yaxiong Wu, Qu Yang, Yasheng Wang, Ruiming Tang, and Yong Liu. 2025. Beyond single-turn: A survey on multi-turn in-teractions with large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2501.09959. Zhen Zhang, Kaiqiang Song, Xun Wang, Yebowen Hu, Weixiang Yan, Chenyang Zhao, Henry Peng Zou, Haoyun Deng, Sathish Reddy Indurthi, Shujian Liu, Simin Ma, Xiaoyang Wang, Xin Eric Wang, and Song Wang. 2026a. CM2: Reinforcement learning with checklist rewards for multi-turn and multi-step agentic tool use. Preprint , arXiv:2602.12268. Zhiwei Zhang, Fei Zhao, Rui Wang, Zezhong Wang, Bin Liang, Jiakang Wang, Yao Hu, Shaosheng Cao, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2026b. Robust tool use via Fission-GRPO: Learning to recover from execution errors. Preprint , arXiv:2601.15625. Weikang Zhao, Xili Wang, Chengdi Ma, Lingbin Kong, Zhaohua Yang, Mingxiang Tuo, Xiaowei Shi, Yitao Zhai, and Xunliang Cai. 2025. MUA-RL: Multi-turn user-interacting agent reinforcement learning for agentic tool use. Preprint , arXiv:2508.18669. 

Appendix A SAP Pipeline Details 

This appendix expands the design choices behind the three agents and the rewrite operators of §4. 

A.1 Detailed FSM Specification 

The FSM of §3.2 is realized by mapping each do-main’s tool documentation to a shared, domain-agnostic state-type taxonomy that lists which dia-logue phases may appear in any tool-use scenario. New domains reuse the same taxonomy and down-stream protocol; supplying updated tool documen-tation is sufficient to regenerate the corresponding states and transitions, without manually rewriting rule code. 

State-type taxonomy ( Σ). We use 13 abstract types reused across all domains: INITIAL (session start); AUTH_REQUIRED / AUTH_COMPLETED (authen-tication phases); INFO_GATHERING (waiting for user-supplied arguments); SEARCHING (read-only lookup in progress); FOUND / UNAVAILABLE (lookup outcomes); ACTION_REQUIRED (irreversible action pending user confirmation); ACTION_COMPLETED 

(action persisted by the executor); ERROR (recov-erable executor error); REJECTION (out-of-scope or invalid request); COMPLETED (terminal success); and NORMAL (catch-all for domain-specific interme-diate phases). Each σ ∈ Σ instantiates exactly one of these types. 

Transition record ( δ ∈ ∆). Each transition car-ries six fields beyond the source/target states: • action : the tool (or composite tool list Cδ)whose invocation realizes the transition. • condition : a natural-language guard ( Aplan uses this in-context). • probability : base sampling probability used by the weighted random walk over F.• weight : long-tail emphasis weight (see §A.2). • is_critical : marks rare but high-value paths (e.g., authentication failure, payment-error branches) that the long-tail emphasis subset E

preferentially covers. • provenance_tag : realizes Tδ at the en-gineering level, encoded as a nested map {tool:{arg: tag}} where tag 

∈ {initial_state, prev_output, self_create, prev_user_msg} (the four design-time entries of Sdecl ; Pf is reserved for runtime and never appears here). 

Cross-domain reuse. Our implementation pro-vides concrete FSMs for the τ 2-bench Retail and Airline domains and for the BFCL v4 multi-turn domains (e.g., Twitter, file system), all instanti-ating the taxonomy above. The Retail FSM, for example, defines |Σ| = 25 states (including domain-specific instances such as auth_email_prompt ,

info_gathering_order_id , search_order ,

order_found , action_confirm_cancel ,

cancel_success ) and |∆| = 35 transitions; the Airline and BFCL multi-turn FSMs reach comparable scale. A representative transition record:    

> {"from_state": "info_gathering_order_id", "to_state": "search_order", "action": "search_order", "condition": "user supplies order ID", "probability": 1.0, "weight": 1.0, "is_critical": false, "provenance_tag": { "search_order": { "order_id": "prev_user_msg" }}}

Adding a new domain therefore requires only sup-plying its tool documentation for this mapping; no change to Sdecl , the executor protocol, or down-stream agents is needed. 

A.2 Vspec : Structural Constraints and Long-Tail Coverage 

The verifier Vspec rejects an FSM F produced by 

AFSM on three routine sanity checks (topological legality of Σ, ∆; existence of at least one length-

N path from σ0; argument completeness of Tδ for every required argument) and triggers regeneration. A more substantive constraint forbids Po and Pu

on the first edge (outgoing from σ0). This is the most frequent failure mode we observed in AFSM ’s raw output: because the FSM is drafted in one pass, the very first turn is often declared to reuse a prior return or an earlier user message even though no prior turn exists. Rejecting such skeletons at the verifier removes this “first-turn reference to non-existent context” error before any planning cost is incurred. 

Long-tail coverage via inverse-frequency empha-sis. Pure unconstrained sampling lets head tools dominate F and starves rare tools of training sig-nal. We maintain a flat call-frequency histogram 

H : T → N across all synthesized trajectories and, for each new FSM, sample an emphasis subset 

E ⊆ T under inverse-frequency weighting; AFSM 

must commit at least one turn whose call list in-tersects E. H encodes only tool frequencies, not inter-tool dependencies, so the resulting bias does not leak any graph structure back into F.

A.3 Aplan + ε: Filling Protocol 

Aplan fills each call ti in turn δk in a refill-on-failure loop. Two design choices are worth highlighting. 

Two parallel outputs. The planner emits two parallel objects per call: 

(θexec  

> i

, θprov  

> i

) ∼ A plan (ti, Tδ[ti], H<k , c 0, ℓ last ) ,

(4) where θexec  

> i

holds the executor-bound argument val-ues and θprov  

> i

holds the per-argument Provenance Tag and (if applicable) the upstream reference. De-coupling the two tracks lets the executor proceed with θexec  

> i

while every fallback escalation or up-stream rebinding is logged into θprov  

> i

without dis-turbing dispatch. 

Error feedback as in-context signal. On a failed call, the executor error ℓlast is fed back into the next prompt rather than discarded. This converts the executor into an in-context critic for the planner LLM, which empirically removes most repeated schema/type errors within a couple of refills. If a call still fails after the cap, the trajectory is trun-cated at the current turn, and trajectories left too short are dropped to avoid degenerate samples. 

A.4 Aplan : Intra-Turn Parallelization Grouping 

Many tool-set backends admit multiple paral-lel calls within a single turn (e.g., independent lookups). After all calls of a turn are bound (i.e., arguments filled and validated), Aplan partitions them into ordered groups (G1, . . . , G p) such that no Po edge lies within a group (at execution time, intra-group returns become visible only after the entire group completes), with groups ordered by minimum call index. 

A.5 Aplan : Resolving the Pu Dependency Cycle 

The Pu type is the only source whose dialogue ren-dering lies outside Aplan ’s purview, since user mes-sages are synthesized later by Amsg . We resolve the cycle through a remap-bind-restore protocol mediated by a virtual history ∆v.

Virtual history ∆v. ∆v is a per-turn list of pending introductions : ∆v[k] =

{(p1, v 1), (p2, v 2), . . . }, meaning “uk must explicitly introduce values v1, v 2, . . . for down-stream consumption.” Aplan populates ∆v during planning; Amsg later consumes it in turn order. 

Remap-bind-restore. For each argument p with 

src( p) = Pu at turn k, the planner first samples an anchor turn k⋆ < k , avoiding turns that already anchor an unrelated value of the same surface form (otherwise the later disambiguator could not tell two homonymous anchors apart). It then temporar-ily sets src( p) ← Pc and invokes the filling proto-col of Appendix A.3 to obtain a concrete value v

that passes executor validation. Finally, it restores the tag to Pu (recording k⋆ as the anchor turn) and appends (p, v ) to ∆v[k⋆].

Closure check. After all turns are planned, a clo-sure check verifies that every Pu argument with anchor k⋆ has a matching pair in ∆v[k⋆] and that 

Amsg later emits v as an explicit literal in uk⋆ un-der normalized (case- and whitespace-insensitive) matching. Closure failures roll back the trajectory. Conceptually, the trick is that Pc depends on no upstream, so reassigning the tag yields a value that is both executor-valid and free to appear anywhere earlier in the dialogue; ∆v is the bridge that turns this freedom into a contract honored by Amsg .

A.6 Amsg : Must-Mention Dispatch and Per-Call Synthesis 

Amsg synthesizes uk under a per-turn must-mention list Mk derived from θprov and ∆v[k]. Four mark-ers cover all surface behaviors of values in uk (Ta-ble 4). Pi values that the assistant can discover via auxiliary read-only calls (e.g., listing the cur-rent directory) are dropped from Mk; only those that must be passed verbatim into a tool argument (IDs, credentials, token-like fields) are marked 

[FROM_CONFIG] .

Per-call decomposition. A naive prompt would hand Amsg the entire Mk and ask for uk in one shot; in practice this causes the LLM to overload the front of uk with literals and skip later con-straints. We instead slice Mk per call, 

Mk =

> n

G

> i=1

M(i) 

> k

, (5) Marker Trigger (when processing turn k) Expression constraint in uk                      

> [NEW] src( p) = Pc,or (p, v )∈∆v[k](anchor for downstream Pu)Explicit literal value: first occurrence in the dialogue.
> [FROM_HISTORY] src( p)∈ { Po, P u}(upstream at turn <k)Vague reference (“that file”, “the ID you found earlier”); literal must NOT be re-peated.
> [FROM_CONFIG] src( p) = Pi, value must be passed verba-tim to a tool argument Explicit literal value (the assistant can-not read c0): IDs, credentials, token-like fields.
> [FALLBACK_from_ s0]src( p) = Pf(original source s0in meta-data) Treated as [NEW] : explicit literal value.

Table 4: Must-mention markers dispatched by the orchestrator to Amsg for user-message synthesis. 

where M(i) 

> k

contains only the slots that ci actually consumes, generate an intent fragment ϕi for each 

ci under its slice, and concatenate the fragments with sequencing connectives: 

uk = Compose( ϕ1, . . . , ϕ n), (6) 

ϕi = Amsg (ci | H <k , M(i) 

> k

). (7) The per-call decomposition yields by construction the property that every ground-truth call has a cor-responding semantic expression in uk, which re-moves the need for an additional “call coverage” post-check. 

Four prompt-level constraints. On top of M(i) 

> k

,the fragment prompt enforces four semantic con-straints that empirically suppress the most common degenerations: (i) uk is the sole signal driving the assistant on tool-call turns, so it cannot rely on as-sistant clarification; (ii) every entry in M(i) 

> k

must be matched by an expression in ϕi; (iii) the seman-tic direction of ϕi must agree with ci’s actual op-eration (when ci is unfollow , ϕi must not express “follow”); (iv) when uk belongs to a different intent family from prior turns (e.g., search →delete), the shift must be expressed explicitly. These collec-tively prevent silently mis-aligned user messages from passing the downstream LLM judge. 

Assistant text responses. On turns with 

Ck = ∅, Amsg uses a dedicated prompt (e.g., 

ASSIST_CLARIFY_PROMPT for MissParam) and is required to (i) address the immediately preceding user intent (e.g., request the missing argument), (ii) introduce no new tool call or capability promise, and (iii) not disclose information that the real tool returns have not exposed. The prior context visible to Amsg is the real executed history (calls, arguments, returns, descriptions), so both user and assistant text are grounded against actual returns rather than speculative ones. 

A.7 Challenge-Scenario Rewrite Operators 

Both rewrite operators take a validated base trajec-tory and produce a hard variant; the salient trick they share is an executor-replay check: the rewrit-ten trajectory is re-executed through ε and accepted only when its execution outcome matches the orig-inal base. Without this check, vague-reference rewrites or toolkit removals can silently produce unsolvable trajectories. 

Ψparam (MissParam). The operator samples one or more arguments with src( p) = Pc from the base, replaces the corresponding literals in uk∗ with vague references (“ report.pdf ” → “that file”), and empties turn k∗’s ground-truth call list. The as-sistant therefore emits a clarification request synthe-sized by Amsg in place of a tool call. A new reveal turn is inserted at position k∗ + 1 in which Amsg 

generates a natural user message surfacing the miss-ing values, and the original call is rebound at this turn. Multiple missing arguments may be revealed in a single turn or spread across several reveal turns; the operator is agnostic to the dataset’s exact clarifi-cation format (free text, a request_for_info slot, etc.). 

Ψfunc (MissFunc). The operator removes a tool 

t∗ that the base actually invokes from the visible toolkit at turn k∗, so the assistant cannot proceed. A user-side handoff message is injected whose seman-tic event is “new tools have been registered into the visible toolkit,” re-exposing T ; the assistant then invokes t∗ at k∗ + 1 . Both the validator and the training objective are driven by this semantic event, not the surface wording, so alternative carriers (a system-side marker, an external tool-registry event) are interchangeable; this keeps Ψfunc compatible with future handoff paraphrase strategies. B Additional Ablation Studies 

This appendix complements the main-paper ab-lations of §5.3 with three pipeline-side stud-ies: a synthesis-cost estimate (§B.1), a cross-backbone fallback-rate analysis (§B.2), and a pipeline-component ablation on data-generation success rate (§B.3). 

B.1 Synthesis Cost 

We reran the same synthesis pipeline while record-ing API usage for 500 validated multi-turn trajec-tories. The measured average cost was $0.49 per trajectory. Extrapolating this cost under the same pipeline configuration and trajectory mix gives an estimated cost of approximately $4,410 for the re-leased set of about 9k trajectories. This estimate covers synthesis-time API usage and excludes SFT training and downstream evaluation. Because com-parable trajectory-level billing logs are unavailable for existing methods, we do not make a direct nu-merical cost comparison; local retry is expected to avoid some recomputation by refilling only failed calls rather than regenerating complete trajectories. 

B.2 Plan-Agent Fallback Rate Across Backbones 

To assess how faithfully different backbones honor the FSM-declared sources, we run Aplan on the same 500 FSM skeletons with four backbones and measure the Pf rate, defined as the frac-tion of filled arguments for which the declared 

s0 ∈ { Pi, P o, P u} cannot be used directly and the planner records a recovery binding. A recovery uses a Pi or Pc value when permitted; the result-ing call is executor-validated after binding, and the original s0 remains in fallback_from . This is an argument-level fallback (the Pf Provenance Tag of §3.3). We also report the distribution of declared sources actually consumed ( Pi / Po / Pc). 

Pu arguments are counted under Pc in this distri-bution, because the remap-bind-restore protocol of Appendix A.5 binds their values through the Pc

path at fill time and only restores the tag afterwards; the three source columns and Fb.% therefore sum to 100 up to rounding. Lower fallback indicates stricter adherence to the Provenance Invariant. This study is a separate synthesis run from the pipeline ablation of Appendix B.3, using its own sampled skeletons and initial configs, so the absolute pro-portions are not directly comparable across the two tables.                                

> Backbone Traj Args Fb.% Pi%Po%Pc%Gemini-3.1 Pro 500 3,962 2.02 42.7 25.5 29.8 Gemini-3 Pro 500 4,348 2.76 36.4 24.0 36.9 DeepSeek-V4-Flash 500 3,253 3.08 28.3 9.2 59.4 Qwen3.5-Plus 500 4,365 4.82 27.3 34.4 33.5
> Table 5: Cross-backbone Pfstudy on identical FSM skeletons. Traj is the number of trajectories and Args the total number of filled arguments across them; Fb.% is the runtime fallback rate; the remaining columns show the distribution of declared sources actually consumed by Aplan .

Observations. (i) Gemini-3.1 Pro achieves the lowest fallback (2.02%) and the highest Pi uti-lization (42.7%), indicating the strongest adher-ence to declared sources. (ii) Qwen3.5-Plus shows the highest fallback (4.82%) with heterogeneous 

fallback_from labels ( default , user_request ,

user_intent ), suggesting weaker compliance with the FSM-imposed source constraint. (iii) DeepSeek-V4-Flash exhibits an atypical distribu-tion: Po drops to 9.2% while Pc climbs to 59.4%, and the total argument count is the lowest (3,253 vs. 4,348 for Gemini-3 Pro on the same skeletons). The backbone tends to fabricate literals rather than reference prior tool returns, producing shorter tra-jectories. (iv) Gemini-3 Pro sits in the middle (2.76%) with all fallbacks routed through Pc, giv-ing the most predictable failure mode. Our main pipeline therefore stays within the Gemini family: Gemini-3.1 Pro drives AFSM , whose cost is amor-tized because one skeleton yields several sampled trajectories, while Aplan uses Gemini-3 Pro, whose endpoint remained stable at the request throughput a full synthesis run requires. 

B.3 Pipeline-Level Ablation 

Table 6 reports the effect of turning off individual pipeline components on data generation success rate and argument-source distribution. All variants use Gemini-3 Pro as the backbone and share the same toolset and initial-config pool. This is an in-dependent synthesis run from the cross-backbone study of Appendix B.2 (different sampled FSM skeletons and initial configs), so the absolute source proportions differ from Table 5; only within-table comparisons across variants are meaningful. We generate 500 trajectories per variant and measure the executor pass-rate (Succ) and the fraction of arguments assigned to each source type (including the argument-level fallback rate Pf ), with Pu again Variant Succ Pf % Po % Pc % Pi %                             

> Full SAP 89% 2.06 29.5 40.9 27.5 FSM+noTag 92% 0.00 0.0 53.8 46.2 noFSM+Tag 50% 15.75 16.2 43.9 24.2 noFSM+noTag 66% 0.00 0.0 54.2 45.8 noRetry 54% 3.45 24.8 42.3 29.4
> Table 6: Pipeline-level ablation. FSM = structure-first skeleton; Tag = Provenance Tag declarations; Succ = tra-jectories that pass executor validation; Pf= argument-level fallback rate; remaining columns show the fraction of arguments assigned to each source type ( Pucounted under Pc).

counted under Pc as in Appendix B.2. In the Full, FSM+noTag, and noRetry variants, the FSM sam-ples up to 3 paths per trajectory and each call can be refilled up to 3 times on executor failure. In the noFSM variants, only a single path is generated (no FSM path sampling), but the per-call 3-retry refill budget remains. Several patterns stand out. (i) Removing the FSM skeleton (noFSM+Tag) nearly halves the suc-cess rate (89% → 50%) and drastically increases the argument-level fallback rate to 15.75%. This confirms that the FSM’s structure-first prior is the primary guarantor of causal chain existence: with-out the FSM’s macro-level path planning, Aplan 

degenerates into free-form turn-by-turn generation. Although the historical context is preserved, the generated tool-call sequences misalign with the Tag-declared causal dependencies (i.e., a Tag de-clares a need for Po, but the preceding tools fail to produce that specific return). Consequently, a massive number of declared Po sources cannot be matched in the history, forcing the planner to fall back to Pc. (ii) Removing only the Provenance Tags (FSM+noTag) actually yields a slightly higher pass-rate (92%) and zero fallback, but produces zero Po arguments; the pipeline reverts to generat-ing only local ( Pi and Pc) sources, losing all cross-turn dependency structure. (iii) Disabling per-call retry (noRetry) cuts the success rate to 54%, high-lighting the importance of the executor-in-the-loop refill mechanism. (iv) The noFSM+noTag variant confirms that the FSM and Tag components are complementary: without either, the pipeline pro-duces only local arguments at a moderate pass-rate. Together, these results complement the training-level ablations of Table 3 by showing that FSM, Tag, and Retry each contribute a distinct and neces-sary function at the data-generation stage.              

> Split Backbone SAP-4B ∆
> Non-live 84.36 84.88 +0.52 Live 75.41 75.95 +0.54 Overall avg 79.89 80.42 +0.53
> Table 7: BFCL v4 single-turn results (accuracy, %). Backbone is Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507; SAP-4B is the same backbone after SFT on SAP data. Multi-turn-only training neither degrades single-turn performance nor regresses on the noisier Live split, and yields small consistent gains on both subsets.

B.4 Out-of-Distribution Generalization on BFCL Single-Turn 

SAP-4B is trained exclusively on multi-turn trajec-tories synthesized by the pipeline of §4. To probe whether this multi-turn-focused training transfers to settings that differ in both interaction structure and task distribution, we evaluate SAP-4B on the BFCL v4 single-turn track (Table 7), which is split into two complementary subsets: • Non-live (simple, parallel, multiple, paral-lel_multiple, irrelevance): static, BFCL-authored benchmark tasks. The distribution is controlled and reproducible; performance here primarily reflects basic function-calling capability (tool se-lection, argument filling, intra-turn parallelism). • Live (live_simple, live_parallel, live_multiple, live_parallel_multiple, live_relevance, live_irrelevance): real-world user-contributed queries with noisier phrasing and broader intent coverage. Performance here is more sensitive to generalization and robustness. Two takeaways. First, multi-turn-only train-ing does not regress on single-turn tasks: Non-live accuracy edges up by +0 .52 , indicating that the multi-turn argument-provenance prior does not interfere with single-step tool selection or argu-ment filling. Second, Live accuracy improves by a comparable +0 .54 ; since Live queries are out-of-distribution with respect to both the synthesis-time tool schemas and the multi-turn structure, this con-stitutes a mild but consistent OOD generalization signal. The overall lift ( +0 .53 ) is modest in abso-lute magnitude but uniformly positive, suggesting that the structural prior induced by Provenance Tag constraints transfers as auxiliary signal even when the trajectory collapses to a single turn. Turns Pi Po Pc/Pf Span           

> Trajectory A (local) 20030Trajectory B (cross-turn) 30212
> Table 8: Source distribution and max dependency span for the two case-study trajectories.

C Case Study: Local vs. Cross-Turn Argument Grounding 

To illustrate how SAP’s provenance constraints shape trajectory structure, we present two simpli-fied trajectories (Figures 4 and 5). Trajectory A uses only local sources; Trajectory B contains a cross-turn Po dependency. Table 8 summarizes their dependency profiles. In Trajectory A, every argument is a literal that the user supplies in the same turn that consumes it ( Pc); no cross-turn propagation occurs, and all arguments have L = 0 . In Trajectory B, by con-trast, the mention call consumes two cross-turn values: tweet_id from Turn 2’s post_tweet re-turn ( L = 1 ) and mentioned_usernames from Turn 1’s list_all_following return ( L = 2 ). SAP produces these dependencies by design: the FSM skeleton declares the Po edges at plan time, and Aplan resolves them against the real executor state before binding. Both trajectories are valid multi-turn dialogues, but SAP’s provenance con-straints make Trajectory B the representative case, directly addressing the dependency-gap diagnostic of §3. 

D Prompt Templates 

This appendix lists condensed English templates of the four core prompts used by the three agents and the rewrite operators (Figures 6–10). Boilerplate (login etiquette, path conventions, output-format reminders) and few-shot examples are omitted; the released code carries the full prompts. Cyan place-holders such as {N} are filled at synthesis time. Trajectory A: Local Grounding Only (Travel domain) Turn 1 

User: “Show me all the credit cards saved on my travel account.” 

Assistant: 

<tool_call> [get_all_credit_cards()] </tool_call> <tool_response> [{"credit_card_list": {"CARD001": {...},"CARD002": {...}}}] </tool_response> 

Turn 2 

User: “Now calculate how much 1.0 USD is in EUR.” 

Assistant: 

<tool_call> [compute_exchange_rate(base_currency="USD",target_currency="EUR", value=1.0)] </tool_call> <tool_response> [{"exchanged_value": 0.91}] </tool_response> 

▷ base_currency , target_currency , value : Pc

Figure 4: Trajectory A with only local sources. The three argument slots of compute_exchange_rate are user-supplied literals ( Pc); the preceding zero-argument call contributes no argument slot, and no argument depends on a prior turn ( L=0 ). Trajectory B: Cross-Turn Po Dependency (Twitter domain) Turn 1 

User: “First check whether I’m logged in, then show me a list of all the accounts I’m currently following.” 

Assistant: 

<tool_call> [posting_get_login_status(), list_all_following()] </tool_call> <tool_response> [{"login_status": true}, {"following_list": ["dev_tips","popular_science", "movie_reviews", "ai_updates", "nature_news"]}] ,→

</tool_response> 

Turn 2 

User: “Now post a tweet with the text ‘Trying to tweet more intentionally...’.” 

Assistant: 

<tool_call> [post_tweet(content="Trying to tweet more intentionally...")] </tool_call> <tool_response> [{"id": 16, ...}] </tool_response> 

Turn 3 

User: “Now mention all the accounts I follow in that tweet.” 

Assistant: 

<tool_call> [mention(tweet_id=16, mentioned_usernames=["dev_tips","popular_science", "movie_reviews", "ai_updates","nature_news"])] ,→

</tool_call> <tool_response> [{"mention_status": "success"}] </tool_response> 

▷ content : Pc (Turn 2); tweet_id : Po (k′=2 , j ′=1 , id ); mentioned_usernames : Po

(k′=1 , j ′=2 , following_list )

Figure 5: Trajectory B with cross-turn Po dependencies: Turn 3’s mention consumes tweet_id from Turn 2’s 

post_tweet return and mentioned_usernames from Turn 1’s list_all_following return (maximum span 

L⋆=2 ). AFSM : FSM Skeleton Synthesis 

<task> You are an FSM designer. Build executable, logically sound, diverse FSM skeletons for multi-turn tool-calling dialogs over a target toolset. </task> <structural_constraints> - Exactly one state with type="initial" ; at least one terminal state. - Each turn carries fields from / to / action / function_calls / prov_tag .- function_calls has length 1–10; names must come exactly from the provided tool list. </structural_constraints> <design_constraints> - DAG-structured (no cycles); depth ≥ {N} from σ0.- Call-count distribution: ∼40% turns with 2–4 calls, ∼45% with 5–7, ∼15% with one. Each combination must reflect a realistic single-step user intent. - Cross-turn dependencies: later turns may reference earlier returns or user-supplied values. - Order: login first; search before result-dependent actions; status-check tools only in “check” intents. - Long-tail coverage: at least one turn must use a tool from the emphasis subset {emphasis_set} .</design_constraints> <provenance_tag_declaration> For every required argument, declare prov_tag[tool][param] from one of: - initial_state : value pre-exists in the initial-state summary (IDs, filenames, credentials). - prev_output : value read from a prior tool’s return. - self_create : new user-supplied value (new filename, tweet text, search keyword). - prev_user_msg : value already provided in an earlier user message. Rules: every required param must appear; the first turn out of σ0 may NOT use prev_output or 

prev_user_msg ; login credentials must use initial_state .</provenance_tag_declaration> <inputs> Available tools: {tool_summaries} 

Initial-config summary: {initial_state} 

</inputs> <output> Output ONLY <fsm>JSON</fsm> matching {schema_hint} . No explanatory text. </output>   

> Figure 6: Prompt template for AFSM (FSM skeleton synthesis). Aplan : Per-Call Argument Filling

<task> You are filling parameters for a SINGLE tool call at turn {turn_idx} . Tool to call: {func_name} .</task> <inputs> - Tool signature: description, required params, properties: {tool_doc} 

- Declared Provenance Tags from Phase 1 FSM: {prov_tag} 

- Previous turns history (executed calls and their returns): {history} 

- Initial state (starting state; may be modified by earlier turns): {initial_state} 

- Last attempt error (if refill): {last_error} 

</inputs> <output_format> Output <result>JSON</result> with two keys: - args_for_exec : the actual parameter values for execution. null is only acceptable for OPTIONAL params whose documentation explicitly states that null means “no filter / default behavior”. - args_provenance : per-argument provenance metadata. src MUST be one of: • initial_state : value from initial state (also set config_path )• prev_output : value from a prior turn’s tool return (also set ref_turn and ref_field )• self_create : value you create in this turn • prev_user_msg : value the user provided in an earlier turn (also set introduce_in_turn <

current turn) • fallback : declared upstream is unavailable and this binding uses a recovery value; the resulting call must then be validated by execution (also set fallback_from to the original src) </output_format> <rules> - If the declared source is unavailable, recover the argument from Pi or Pc when permitted. Record 

fallback whenever this recovery path replaces the declared source. Bind the recovery value and let the executor validate the resulting call. - NEVER fabricate existing entities or credentials: IDs, tokens, usernames, passwords, or existing resource paths must be grounded in an executor-visible source. - For prev_user_msg , introduce_in_turn must be strictly before the current turn. - For prev_output , ref_turn /ref_field must identify a real prior return field. </rules>        

> Figure 7: Prompt template for Aplan (per-call argument filling). The two-track output (θexec ,θprov )corresponds to
> args_for_exec and args_provenance .Amsg : User-Message Synthesis

<task> You are a multi-turn dialogue data generator. Given a tool-calling sequence (GT) for the current turn, generate the corresponding natural user message. </task> <inputs> - Prior conversation history (the user said what, the assistant called which tools, what they returned): 

{prior_text} 

- Current turn’s expected tool calls (GT): {turn_gt} 

- Per-argument source guide for this turn (the must-mention list {must_mention} , marker semantics below). </inputs> <must_mention_markers> Express each parameter according to its source marker: - [NEW] : explicitly state the value (e.g., filename, number, keyword). - [FROM_HISTORY] : use a vague reference (“that file”, “the ID you found earlier”); do NOT repeat the exact value, but the reference must be unambiguous. - [FROM_CONFIG] : explicitly state the exact value verbatim. The assistant cannot read the initial state, so IDs, credentials, and token-like fields must appear character-for-character. - [FALLBACK_from_ . . . ]: the original source was unavailable and a value was created; treat as [NEW] 

and state it explicitly. </must_mention_markers> <core_constraints> 1. Assistant capability boundary : the assistant can ONLY call tools, not reply with text. The user message is the only input driving its behavior; it must contain enough information for correct tool calls. 2. Parameter completeness : every parameter used this turn must be naturally expressed in the user message according to its marker. 3. Semantic alignment : the user message’s semantic direction must match what the tools actually do (e.g., unfollow ̸ = “follow”, rm = “delete”). 4. Intent-shift handling : if this turn’s intent differs from prior turns, explicitly state the transition. 5. History is fact : write the message conditioned on the provided history; do not modify history. 6. Full GT coverage : if the GT lists n tool calls, the user message must naturally cover every call (chain them with “first . . . , then . . . , finally . . . ” when needed). </core_constraints> <style> 60% conversational + 40% instructional; 1–3 sentences; named values quoted; never reference tool internals. </style> <output> 

<msg>{"turn_idx": {turn_idx}, "user_msg": ". . . "}</msg> 

</output>                

> Figure 8: Prompt template for Amsg on user-message synthesis. The must-mention list is pre-rendered by the dispatcher of Appendix A.6 from θprov and ∆v, with each entry already tagged [NEW] /[FROM_HISTORY]
> /[FROM_CONFIG] /[FALLBACK from . . . ].Amsg : Assistant Text Response (on no-tool-call turn)

<task> You are the assistant in a multi-turn tool-calling conversation. Write the NEXT assistant reply body when this turn has no further tool calls. </task> <requirements> 1. Output ONLY natural language, no tool calls, no JSON, no placeholders. 2. If tasks have been completed, briefly summarize and ask if anything else is needed. 3. If the task cannot continue (missing tool, missing argument, permission), explain why politely and suggest next steps. 4. Match the language of the user. 5. Report errors honestly: never claim success when prior tool returns contain error / fail / exception / empty / NULL .6. NEVER answer the requested tool-action from general knowledge, NEVER invent a result, NEVER claim the action was done unless prior tool messages prove it. 7. Blocking-reply rule: if later turns may supply more tools or missing arguments, this current reply must state what is missing rather than pre-computing the answer. </requirements>       

> Figure 9: Prompt template for Amsg on assistant text responses (turns with Ck=∅).
> Rewrite-Operator Hints ( Ψparam ,Ψfunc )

<MISS_PARAM_CLOSED_LOOP> 

(injected into Aplan at the recovery turn k∗ + 1 )

The previous turn k∗ should have called {tool} but lacked required parameters {missing_params} .The current turn’s user message has supplied them. Call {tool} now with all required parameters (including the previously missing ones), unless the user’s intent has clearly shifted, in which case call a more appropriate tool. Logical alignment with the user takes priority over closing the loop. </MISS_PARAM_CLOSED_LOOP> <TOOL_INJECTION> 

(injected at the recovery turn k∗ + 1 )

The current turn is a tool-injection turn: the system has just registered new tools {func_names} into the visible toolkit. Prefer these newly registered tools when they match the user’s intent. Even when 

{question_k} is the empty list [] , the ground truth must remain non-empty: extract the required parameters from the prior turn k∗ = k − 1, whose unmet request triggered the injection. </TOOL_INJECTION> <MISSING_FUNCTION_REQUEST> 

(injected at the request turn k∗, before the handoff message) 

The current turn is a request turn: the user asks for tools {func_names} that are NOT yet in the visible function-doc. You MUST output [] for this turn, even if other tools are available; calling any tool here breaks the operator’s semantics. </MISSING_FUNCTION_REQUEST>