Title: VibeJam: A User Study Platform for Web Development with Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.29889v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 01:57:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# VibeJam: A User Study Platform for Web Development with Agents 

Nishant Balepur 1,2 Connor Baumler 1 Valerie Chen 3

Eunsol Choi 2 Rachel Rudinger 1 Jordan Boyd-Graber 4 ∗

> 1

University of Maryland 2New York University 

> 3

Carnegie Mellon University 4Nanyang Technological University 

Code: https://github.com/nbalepur/vibe-jam 

Video Demo: https://youtu.be/Kg9kqKWszw8 nbalepur@umd.edu jordan.ying@ntu.edu.sg 

Abstract 

Programming with AI is increasingly agentic— users prompt LLM s to directly edit their code and review the changes—with adoption grow-ing especially for web development tasks. De-spite this growth, most NLP work uses offline evaluation and lacks support for online studies, losing insights into how programmers truly use coding agents. We release VibeJam, a browser-based user study platform for users to collabo-rate with AI agents to develop websites. Vibe-Jam enables agent customization and uses the open-source Aider agent by default, and to mir-ror downstream use, we add diff review, chat and plan modes, and live website previews. In a pilot study with 55 released, game-based web-site creation tasks, five experienced AI program-mers rate our system as fun, simple, and resem-bling commercial tools, while 13 junior stu-dents use VibeJam to make websites of higher quality than agents in the same task. We open-source VibeJam to spur extensions and support studies on how coding agents can help users. 

1 Introduction: Agentic Coding’s Boom 

Advances in Large Language Models ( LLM s) have shifted AI -assisted coding from autocomplete sug-gestions to agentic workflows (Yang et al., 2025), where a user prompts agents to directly edit code and reviews edits. The growth of tools like Cursor mark this shift, where even novices use agents to write working code (Hu et al., 2026, i.e., vibe code).  

> NLP

progress on coding agents hinges on offline benchmarks (Chen et al., 2021), but to ensure these scores translate to online benefits in deployment, we must assess them in ways mirroring how users work with them (Balepur et al., 2025a). A key rea-son online studies are limited is a lack of system 

> *Work done at University of Maryland

support; existing coding interfaces are either not public (Shen and Tamkin, 2026), require user setup (Yan et al., 2024, e.g., VSCode plugins), or only support older AI features (Mozannar et al., 2025, e.g., autocomplete for task completion), precluding user studies and online evaluations of agents. We release VibeJam 1 (Figure 1), a customiz-able platform for agentic coding user studies that requires no participant setup. Informed by coding reports (Anthropic, 2025) and a survey with eight  

> AI

coding researchers (§2), we initially build Vibe-Jam for web development with features researchers value (e.g., multiple AI modes, model customiza-tion), but open-source it to spur novel extensions. Instead of unrealistically aiming to beat commer-cial coding agents, we design VibeJam to mirror such agents for user studies with downstream re-alism. In VibeJam’s typical study workflow, users design websites ( 1 , §3.1) by collaborating with an AI that can switch between agent, chatbot, and plan modes ( 2 , §3.2). The AI is configurable but uses the open-sourced A IDER framework (Aider, 2023) by default for agents and a prompted LLM for chat and plan modes. Users can prompt the agent ( a ), read execution traces ( b ), review the changes ( c ), and debug with website previews ( d ). After every task, users answer questions ( 3 , §3.4) that researchers can fix across users or tailor to a user’s code via LLM s. Researchers can also mark users as annotators to let them rate all user task submissions on custom metrics ( 4 , §3.5)—so VibeJam helps researchers evaluate user code from their studies. To evaluate VibeJam’s value as a user study plat-form, we first run a pilot study where five users cre-ate a game-based website in VibeJam; they deem     

> 1We use “Jam” as a reference to “Game Jam”, reflecting our hope to inspire fun, creative submissions like games (§4.1). Prompt agent to edit code Accept/reject edits Test and debug code
> Programming with AI Agent Assistance (§2.2) Read Task Description (§2.1) Answer Submission Questions (§2.3) Evaluate User Submissions Post-Study (§2.4)
> View agent trace + summary
> 4132dcba

Figure 1: User study workflow in VibeJam for the task: “Make a game in outer space”. Users read the description of a website or function task ( 1 ) to complete in a VSCode-style editor with an AI agent ( 2 ), along with chat and plan modes (Figures 4, 3). Users prompt the agent to modify files ( a ) and see its execution trace ( b ), which can be reviewed via a diff-based editor ( c ). Users can test their code with a live website preview ( d ). After submitting code, users answer fixed questions or questions generated based on their code ( 3 ). Post-study, researchers can mark specific users as annotators to rate all submissions ( 4 ). We evaluate VibeJam through two user studies in §4. 

our system fun, easy to use, and mirroring com-mercial tools (§4.1). We then run a more realistic study where 13 junior programmers make 22 game-based websites in VibeJam, which end up besting the quality of agents alone (§4.2). These success-ful user study outcomes reveal that VibeJam can support user-centered evaluations of coding agents. We release VibeJam at a time where researchers want to study agents with users in the loop (Wang et al., 2026). Toward this, we end with ways Vibe-Jam can support NLP work in active areas like long-horizon execution, code quality, and AI safety (§6). 

2 A Formative Study to Ground VibeJam 

We run a formative study (Nielsen, 1993) to ensure we design VibeJam to align with what researchers value. Eight NLP +coding researchers from distinct universities review an initial version of our demo, then take a survey to rate the importance of differ-ent file structure, AI interaction, and configurability design choices. We distill their feedback below. Researchers rate website, debugging, and refac-toring tasks as highly important but not function completion (Figure 2, blue), even though current 

> UI

s only support the latter (Mozannar et al., 2025)— leaving a gap VibeJam is designed to address. Each task type needs distinct affordances, so we initially scope VibeJam to a single task rather than aiming to support all coding workflows. We choose web de-velopment for two reasons. First, Anthropic (2025) show web development languages (e.g., JavaScript, HTML) are the most common use case for Claude’s Website Function Debugging Refactoring 054.0 2.6 4.5 4.4                      

> Task Type
> One File One Level Multi-Level Arbitrary 054.0 4.4 4.4 4.1
> File Structure
> Tab Agentic Edits Review Edits Plan Mode Chat Mode Summary Ideas 05
> 3.0 4.4 4.8 4.5 4.5 4.0 3.5
> AI Interaction
> Instructions Eval Criteria Model Execution Questions 054.2 4.4 4.8 4.2 4.2
> Configuration Importance Score

Figure 2: Results from our formative study: 1–5 im-portance scores from AI coding researchers on features they find valuable for a user study platform for agentic coding, which we distill to inform VibeJam’s design. 

coding agents—encompassing over 60% of user re-quests. Second, Robbes et al. (2026) find high adop-tion of coding agents for website tasks on GitHub. Researchers found one level of files sufficient, so we support that scope in §3.1 to reduce the com-plexity of our interface. They rated agentic edits as more important than tab autocomplete (Figure 2, green), confirming the need for an agentic coding system beyond existing UI s (§5). They also high-lighted the value of chat and plan modes, review mechanisms, and summaries, which we add in §3.2. Lastly, all researchers desired customization (Fig-ure 2, red), notably the ability to select the LLM 

backing coding agents and define custom evalua-tion metrics. This inspired us to specifically target the latter via an evaluation pane where designated annotators can rate user-submitted websites (§3.5). Overall feedback was positive, and no one iden-tified an existing system with similar features. One researcher noted the potential of our platform for arena-style rankings (Zheng et al., 2024). Another was “ very excited ” to use VibeJam and felt “ Better vibecode-studying tools would be SUPER useful! ”. We consider this a positive sign to pursue VibeJam and use this feedback to guide our implementation. 

3 VibeJam: An Agentic Coding System 

Informed by the NLP +coding community, we now outline VibeJam’s features (Figure 1). We describe tasks (§3.1), AI tools (§3.2), and debugging (§3.3) in VibeJam, followed by protocols for submitting code (§3.4), scoring submissions (§3.5), and fea-tures to support AI web development studies (§3.6). 

3.1 Task Types 

Each task in VibeJam has users produce a website via an input description, enabling tasks like recre-ating a site to pass test cases (Zhu et al., 2025) or creatively designing a site under high-level themes (Fukumura and Ito, 2025). Researchers can add a task as a database row with a task ID, files the user initially sees (e.g., frontend.js , index.html , 

> styles.css

), and a task description. Upon pick-ing a task, users can click the “Task” tab to view instructions on what to complete (Figure 1, 1 ). 

3.2 Human-AI Interactions 

We center VibeJam on the new paradigm of agentic coding —a user writes a prompt, an AI agent modi-fies the codebase, and the user reviews the changes (Shen et al., 2026)—which has grown popular in Cursor, Claude Code, and Copilot (Robbes et al., 2026). Even users with no coding experience are using said tools via vibe coding (Chou et al., 2026): prompting AI to produce code with minimal review. Given the expected productivity gains and poten-tial risks of this shift (Anthropic, 2026), we ground VibeJam on this interaction (Gomez et al., 2025). We now describe VibeJam’s agentic coding, split into writing (§3.2.1) and reviewing (§3.2.2) code. 

3.2.1 Writing Code with AI Agents 

Users program in VibeJam via Monaco Editor (Mi-crosoft, 2016) from VSCode. Users can write code manually, but informed by §2, we add an AI assis-tant with three modes: 1) agent : directly edit users’ code (Robbes et al., 2026); 2) chat : answer ques-tions about users’ code (Mailach et al., 2025); and 3) plan : create a specification for complex requests, then let the agent in (1) execute the plan (Liu et al., 2026). Each AI is configurable in an API endpoint so researchers can compare designs (Kazemitabaar et al., 2025). We describe the three AI modes next. 

Agent: During agent mode, after the user submits a prompt (Figure 1, a ), the agent writes the user’s files from Monaco to a temporary directory on the backend, edits the files via the user’s request, and returns the new files back to the Monaco editor. We stream all execution edits: which files are being edited and how many lines were changed (Figure 1, b ). When edits end, we prompt an LLM to sum-marize changes and give follow-up ideas for ways users can improve their code (Prompt A.1). Sum-maries are often used in agentic coding tools for Figure 3: In Plan Mode, users write and adjust instructions for complex prompts, later given to the agent to execute. 

comprehension (Wyrich et al., 2023), while we expect follow-up idea generation to facilitate the development of long-horizon coding agents (§6). We implement the A IDER (Aider, 2023) agent by default: an open-source library with 40k stars that supports popular LLM providers (OpenAI, Claude, local LLM s) and over 100 programming languages. To manage errors stemming from long context win-dows (Sinha et al., 2025), we configure A IDER to edit users’ code by generating targeted diff patches versus regenerating files (Xia et al., 2023) and sum-marize prior conversation history when it exceeds the model’s context length (Chang et al., 2024). We also add a button that clears the conversation history so users can directly manage context length. 

Chat: Chat mode helps users who want to under-stand their code, such as during onboarding (Chen et al., 2026). We add it via a prompt (Prompt A.2) where an LLM reads the users’ files, but only returns text or code snippets in the assistant pane without direct edits (Figure 4). We render all produced code snippets with syntax highlighting for readability. 

Plan: Plan mode is a new interaction mechanism where users can iterate with AI to generate a long specification for a complex request (e.g., refactor-ing, new feature), then instruct an agent to execute said specification (Liu et al., 2026). We implement plan mode with an LLM that is prompted to gen-erate a new plan or revise an existing plan based on the users’ request (Prompt A.3), then summa-rizes the changes it makes (Prompt A.4). The plan renders in markdown and can be manually edited. Users can then click “Build“ on the plan to feed it to the A IDER agent or clear it to restart (Figure 3). 

3.2.2 Reviewing AI -Generated Code 

In agent mode, users can review model-generated outputs in the form of “Git diffs”, a desired feature in §2. Users see a dot on all files with AI edits; upon 

> Figure 4: In Chat Mode, users ask questions about their code and view explanations with relevant code snippets.

navigating to one, they can view which lines were added/removed, and buttons to accept or reject the changes at the file or codebase level (Figure 1, c ). These changes are rendered when users preview their websites or run test cases (described in §3.3), informing whether or not to accept them. Users can also prompt the AI to make new changes or manu-ally edit their code before reviewing all changes. 

3.3 Testing and Debugging Code 

Debugging is a key part of software development (Zeller, 2009), so we add support to help users iden-tify and resolve issues. We include a “Preview” tab that allows users to view their current site (Figure 1, d ) and a console that relays all console.log() 

statements (Figure 1, bottom left)—equivalent to 

Inspect Element in Chrome DevTools (Tan-ner et al., 2019). To mitigate risks of running arbi-trary user code, we sandbox all website code in an  

> iframe

without access to the parent interface. 

3.4 Code Submission 

When users submit their code to complete a task, we call a backend API that receives the user’s code and returns questions to ask the user (Figure 1, 3 ). VibeJam supports multiple-choice, multiple-select, and free-response questions. This lets researchers write fixed questions for all users post-submission (Hart and Staveland, 1988), while adding the poten-tial to tailor questions per user via question genera-tion tools (Mitkov et al., 2006). We find the latter promising for constructs like comprehension that require writing questions per-user (Wyrich et al., 2023), which we explore in Appendix A.1. To in-centivize users working toward outputs they may truly use, we add a download button to save a copy of the website. The files also come with a script to publicly deploy the code for free on GitHub Pages. 

3.5 Submission Evaluation 

Along with supporting agentic coding workflows, VibeJam adds support for evaluating user code. Re-searchers can designate certain users as annotators, allowing them to view all task submissions. Anno-tators can open submissions and access the website preview in §3.3 to test users’ code (Figure 1, 4 ). Researchers can define custom evaluation met-rics based on study goals, like creativity and code quality for website tasks. This feature is meant for annotation, but as discussed in the formative (§2), it could enable gamification if users also annotate via in-the-wild peer voting (Indriasari et al., 2023). 

3.6 Supporting Research Studies 

We ensure VibeJam is easy to use. We simplify UI 

setup via bash scripts that: 1) install dependencies; 2) launch the system; and 3) load JSON task data. A login system links all activity to user accounts, enabling cross-session studies. We log most inter-action data: AI prompts/outputs, accept decisions on AI code, user code edits, submission question re-sponses, and annotator ratings. To onboard users new to AI coding, we release tutorial instructions and videos. To facilitate studies, we add templates for consent forms, compensation, and contact. Finally, there are few website tasks to support user studies on web development (Si et al., 2025), so we curate 55 for future work. We desire tasks that are easy-to-understand and fun for users, so we focus on game development (Chi et al., 2026)— hence our system’s name of “VibeJam” (i.e., Vibe Coding plus Game Jams, a type of hack-a-thon for game development). Twelve NLP students ideate 23 replication tasks (e.g., re-create “tic-tac-toe”) and 22 open-ended tasks (e.g., design a game in outer space). One author reviewed all tasks and removed infeasible ones (e.g., tasks calling external API s). Quality Speed Prompt AI Review Code Test Site Fun Tool Similarity 024Likert Score        

> 4.4 4.8 3.6 4.0 4.6 4.6 4.4 Website Perception AI Interaction Experience

Figure 5: User feedback from our pilot survey. Users felt they built higher-quality websites in VibeJam more quickly than without AI , and stated that our system was easy to use, engaging, and similar to commercial tools. 

4 VibeJam in Practice: A Test Case Suite 

To test VibeJam’s practical value, we run two user studies. First, five experienced AI programmers de-sign websites in VibeJam, who note our system’s simplicity, efficacy, and similarity to commercial tools (§4.1). Next, 13 students use VibeJam to build 

22 websites better than agents alone—motivating VibeJam’s value for human-centered evaluations. 

4.1 Pilot: VibeJam Mirrors Commercial Tools 

To validate VibeJam mirrors how programmers use coding agents, we have five CS students with past  

> AI

coding experience each make a website in Vibe-Jam with A IDER (GPT-4.1), completing three of our tasks in §3.6: recreating tic-tac-toe, snake, and connect four. After, they complete a survey with seven 1–5 Likert agreement questions across three dimensions: 1) Website Perceptions (perceived quality and speed compared to coding without AI ); 

2) AI Interactions (ease of prompting, reviewing changes, and previewing the site); and 3) Experi-ence (fun and similarity to existing tools). Users worked on websites until they were personally sat-isfied with the output, which took 15–60 minutes. Users said VibeJam helped them design higher-quality websites more quickly than they would have without AI (Figure 5). Reviewing code and testing websites was easy, but the agent did not follow all prompts perfectly; our analyses found VibeJam— like many coding agents—struggled on complex, multi-step prompts, aligning with research showing the necessity of decomposition for success in agen-tic coding (Ma et al., 2025; Srinath et al., 2025). Lastly, all users rated VibeJam as fun and similar to existing tools, highlighting that user studies in our system can be engaging and ecologically valid (Brunswik, 1955), i.e., mirroring downstream use. Aider (One-Shot) Aider + Self-Prompt 0.0 2.5 5.0  

> Task Adherence
> Aider (One-Shot) Aider + Self-Prompt
> Enjoyment
> Aider (One-Shot) Aider + Self-Prompt 0.0 2.5 5.0
> Creativity
> Aider (One-Shot) Aider + Self-Prompt
> Style
> Worst Users + Aider Best Users + Aider

Figure 6: Evaluation of game websites via A IDER alone versus user+A IDER teams. Our users beat the agents in generating enjoyable, creative, and well-styled games. 

4.2 In-the-Wild Evaluation: Users Develop Better Games Compared to Agents Alone 

To motivate future user-in-the-loop evaluations in VibeJam, we test our system in a realistic setting. 

13 junior programmers (CS undergrads) use Vibe-Jam to make 22 websites from our full list of games (§3.6), including platformer, puzzle, and reaction-time games. Users prompt A IDER 12 .85 ± 3.25 on average per game, indicating high engagement. We compare the user+A IDER teams to two agent-only baselines: (1) prompting A IDER once to create a website from the task description; and (2) taking this initial website and re-prompting A IDER seven more times—the median number of prompts users ask—using its generated follow-up ideas (§3.2). Setting (2) controls for prompting effort. A IDER 

uses the same configuration as in the user study. The first two authors score websites on 5-Likert scales via metrics from Game Jams: task adher-ence, enjoyment, creativity, and style. 2 Their Co-hen’s κ is 0.23 , which indicates fair agreement (Co-hen, 1960). This highlights the subjective nature of game evaluation, which is why Game Jams often use large-scale crowdsourcing. For our evaluation, we average the authors’ scores to reduce variance. Even the lowest-scoring user+A IDER teams sur-pass both agent-only baselines on enjoyment, cre-ativity, and style (Figure 6). The exception is task adherence, where most websites are perfect. Thus, progress in coding agents requires metrics beyond just task completion and analyses of how users can improve outputs with agents (Shen et al., 2026)— gaps VibeJam closes. We plan to keep running this study across all of our 55 game tasks and keep releasing user-agent interaction data as it accrues. 

> 2https://itch.io/jam/gmtk-2024/ results/top-marks

5 Related Work: Agentic Coding Tools 

Given VibeJam’s focus on coding agents, we sum-marize the main ways researchers study such agents and how VibeJam addresses their issues. One study type observes users as they interact with existing, commercial systems like Github Copilot or Cursor (Barke et al., 2023; Chou et al., 2026; Shah et al., 2025). While valuable for understanding current coding practices, researchers have no control of the agent and data collection requires annotation. In contrast, VibeJam is customizable and logs all data. The second type forks IDEs like VSCode (Chi et al., 2025), including CodeGenie (Zhao et al., 2025) for proactive AI suggestions, Ivie for code explanations (Yan et al., 2024), and Trailblazer to answer questions in repositories (Yan et al., 2025). However, these platforms require setup from all of the study participants, while researchers can host VibeJam completely online to simplify onboarding. Lastly, systems closest to us also host online in-terfaces, such as CodeHelp (Liffiton et al., 2024), RealHumanEval (Mozannar et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025), CodingGenie (Zhao et al., 2025), Edit-Trail (Zhang et al., 2026), TiCoder (Lahiri et al., 2022), and Codellaborator (Pu et al., 2025). How-ever, such systems either do not release their code (Vadaparty et al., 2024; Kazemitabaar et al., 2025), do not use modern agents (§3.2), or study func-tion completion—which researchers now value less (§2). VibeJam addresses all of these issues. 

6 Conclusion: Ways to Jam in VibeJam 

Through online studies with users and surveys with researchers, we reveal the value of VibeJam: a sys-tem for AI -assisted coding workflows. We conclude with future research directions that were previously difficult to study, but more feasible with VibeJam. 

Long-Horizon Execution. We increasingly want  

> AI

systems to execute longer tasks (METR, 2026), including programming. However, as long-horizon execution requires intermediate feedback (Strüber et al., 2025; Balepur et al., 2026b), researchers could deploy VibeJam to collect traces from expert programmers while they complete long tasks. We can train models on how experts decompose tasks, which AI changes are accepted, and which follow-up ideas are useful, aiding long-horizon execution. 

Rewarding Code Quality. The main reward for coding benchmarks is task completion (Chen et al., 2021; Jimenez et al., 2024). However, this alone may incentivize low-quality coding practices—like extensive fallbacks and hard-coded paths (Sabra et al., 2025)—that preclude downstream use. We are excited about the possibility of training reward models on programmer edits (Chakrabarty et al., 2025) or human judgments of code in VibeJam’s evaluation pane (§3.5) to improve AI code quality. 

Monitorability. A safety risk of coding agents is monitorability (Korbak et al., 2025); programmers may struggle to identify severe AI bugs, especially if they have not learned the skills to do so (Shen and Tamkin, 2026). VibeJam could serve as a platform to train these skills: teaching programmers how to quickly and accurately review AI -generated code (Sarma and Chen, 2024), designing scaffolds to make monitoring simpler (Guan et al., 2026), and building tools to automatically detect failures from system execution traces (Balepur et al., 2026a,c). 

Agent Design. The best coding agent designs are opaque (Wang et al., 2026) and without a platform to evaluate them, researchers must follow decisions from commercial tools. VibeJam changes this by letting researchers test custom agents, answering: which LLM best improves productivity (Chi et al., 2025), the value of planning and clarification pre-execution (Balepur et al., 2025b), and methods for handling long-context inputs (Zhang et al., 2025). 

Acknowledgments 

We thank the CLIP lab at the University of Mary-land for their support. In particular, we thank Yapei Chang, Zongxia Li, Dang Nguyen, Feng Gu, Yu Hou, Paiheng Xu, and Maharshi Gor for demo-ing our system. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation un-der IIS -2339746 (Rudinger), IIS -2403436 (Boyd-Graber), and DGE -2236417 (Balepur). Boyd-Graber’s research is also supported by a gift from Adobe Corporation. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not nec-essarily reflect the views of sponsors. 

References 

Aider. 2023. Aider: Ai pair programming in your ter-minal. Open-source AI pair programming tool for editing code with LLMs in a terminal environment. Anthropic. 2025. Anthropic economic index: Ai’s impact on software development. https: //www.anthropic.com/research/ impact-software-development .Anthropic. 2026. 2026 agentic coding trends report: How coding agents are reshaping software develop-ment. Nishant Balepur, Atrey Desai, and Rachel Rudinger. 2026a. Test-time reasoners are strategic multiple-choice test-takers. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 250–272, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nishant Balepur, Malachi Hamada, Varsha Kishore, Sergey Feldman, Amanpreet Singh, Pao Siangliu-lue, Joseph Chee Chang, Rachel Rudinger, Eunsol Choi, Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber, et al. 2026b. Drac-ula: hunting for the actions users want deep research agents to execute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.23815 .Nishant Balepur, Bhavya Rajasekaran, Hyunjin Jane Oh, Michael Xie, Atrey Desai, Vipul Gupta, Steven James Moore, Eunsol Choi, Rachel Rudinger, and Jor-dan Lee Boyd-Graber. 2026c. BenchMarker: An education-inspired toolkit for highlighting flaws in multiple-choice benchmarks. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15793–15824, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nishant Balepur, Rachel Rudinger, and Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber. 2025a. Which of these best describes multiple choice evaluation with LLMs? a) forced B) flawed C) fixable D) all of the above. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 3394–3418, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nishant Balepur, Matthew Shu, Yoo Yeon Sung, Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, Shi Feng, Fumeng Yang, Rachel Rudinger, and Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber. 2025b. A good plan is hard to find: Aligning models with preferences is misaligned with what helps users. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11579–11606. Shraddha Barke, Michael B James, and Nadia Po-likarpova. 2023. Grounded copilot: How program-mers interact with code-generating models. Pro-ceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages ,7(OOPSLA1):85–111. Egon Brunswik. 1955. Representative design and prob-abilistic theory in a functional psychology. Psycho-logical review , 62(3):193. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Philippe Laban, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2025. AI-slop to AI-polish? aligning language models through edit-based writing rewards and test-time computation. In Second Conference on Lan-guage Modeling .Yapei Chang, Kyle Lo, Tanya Goyal, and Mohit Iyyer. 2024. Booookscore: A systematic exploration of book-length summarization in the era of LLMs. In 

The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka-plan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sas-try, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cum-mings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Eliza-beth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. Valerie Chen, Ameet Talwalkar, Robert Brennan, and Graham Neubig. 2026. Code with me or for me? how increasing ai automation transforms developer workflows. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Confer-ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’26, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Valerie Chen, Alan Zhu, Sebastian Zhao, Hussein Mozannar, David Sontag, and Ameet Talwalkar. 2025. Need help? designing proactive ai assistants for pro-gramming. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Confer-ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–18. Wayne Chi, Valerie Chen, Anastasios Nikolas An-gelopoulos, Wei-Lin Chiang, Aditya Mittal, Naman Jain, Tianjun Zhang, Ion Stoica, Chris Donahue, and Ameet Talwalkar. 2025. Copilot arena: A platform for code LLM evaluation in the wild. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Wayne Chi, Yixiong Fang, Arnav Yayavaram, Sid-dharth Yayavaram, Seth Karten, Qiuhong Anna Wei, Runkun Chen, Alexander Wang, Valerie Chen, Ameet Talwalkar, and Chris Donahue. 2026. Gamedevbench: Evaluating agentic capabilities through game development. In Second Workshop on Agents in the Wild: Safety, Security, and Beyond .Yi-Hung Chou, Boyuan Jiang, Yi Wen Chen, Mingyue Weng, Victoria Jackson, Thomas Zimmermann, and James A. Jones. 2026. Building software by rolling the dice: A qualitative study of vibe coding. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. , 3(FSE). Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and psychological mea-surement , 20(1):37–46. Kazuma Fukumura and Takayuki Ito. 2025. Can llm-powered multi-agent systems augment human creativ-ity? evidence from brainstorming tasks. In Proceed-ings of the ACM Collective Intelligence Conference ,pages 20–29. Catalina Gomez, Sue Min Cho, Shichang Ke, Chien-Ming Huang, and Mathias Unberath. 2025. Human-ai collaboration is not very collaborative yet: A tax-onomy of interaction patterns in ai-assisted decision making from a systematic review. Frontiers in Com-puter Science , 6:1521066. Melody Y. Guan, Miles Wang, Micah Carroll, Zehao Dou, Annie Y. Wei, Marcus Williams, Benjamin Ar-nav, Joost Huizinga, Ian D Kivlichan, Amelia Glaese, Jakub Pachocki, and Bowen Baker. 2026. Moni-toring monitorability. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning .Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland. 1988. Develop-ment of nasa-tlx (task load index): Results of empiri-cal and theoretical research. In Advances in psychol-ogy , volume 52, pages 139–183. Elsevier. Haoyu Hu, Raja Marjieh, Katherine M Collins, Chenyi Li, Thomas L Griffiths, Ilia Sucholutsky, and Nori Ja-coby. 2026. Why human guidance matters in collabo-rative vibe coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10473 .Theresia Devi Indriasari, Paul Denny, Danielle Lot-tridge, and Andrew Luxton-Reilly. 2023. Gamifica-tion improves the quality of student peer code review. 

Computer Science Education , 33(3):458–482. Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can language mod-els resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Majeed Kazemitabaar, Oliver Huang, Sangho Suh, Austin Z Henley, and Tovi Grossman. 2025. Explor-ing the design space of cognitive engagement tech-niques with ai-generated code for enhanced learning. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , IUI ’25, page 695–714, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Ma-chinery. Tomek Korbak, Mikita Balesni, Elizabeth Barnes, Yoshua Bengio, Joe Benton, Joseph Bloom, Mark Chen, Alan Cooney, Allan Dafoe, Anca Dragan, et al. 2025. Chain of thought monitorability: A new and fragile opportunity for ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.11473 .Shuvendu K Lahiri, Sarah Fakhoury, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Saikat Chakraborty, Madanlal Musuvathi, Piali Choudhury, Curtis von Veh, Jee-vana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, et al. 2022. In-teractive code generation via test-driven user-intent formalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05950 .Mark Liffiton, Brad E Sheese, Jaromir Savelka, and Paul Denny. 2024. Codehelp: Using large language models with guardrails for scalable support in pro-gramming classes. In Proceedings of the 23rd Koli Calling International Conference on Computing Ed-ucation Research , Koli Calling ’23, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Jiacheng Liu, Xiaohan Zhao, Xinyi Shang, and Zhiqiang Shen. 2026. Dive into claude code: The design space of today’s and future ai agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.14228 .Qianou Ma, Weirui Peng, Chenyang Yang, Hua Shen, Ken Koedinger, and Tongshuang Wu. 2025. What should we engineer in prompts? training humans in requirement-driven llm use. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction , 32(4):1–27. Walid Maalej, Rebecca Tiarks, Tobias Roehm, and Rainer Koschke. 2014. On the comprehension of program comprehension. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) ,23(4):1–37. Alina Mailach, Dominik Gorgosch, Norbert Siegmund, and Janet Siegmund. 2025. “ok pal, we have to code that now”: interaction patterns of programming be-ginners with a conversational chatbot. Empirical Software Engineering , 30(1):34. METR. 2026. Task-completion time horizons of frontier ai models. https://metr.org/ time-horizons/ .Microsoft. 2016. Monaco editor. Source code reposi-tory of a browser-based code editor used by VS Code. Ruslan Mitkov, Le An Ha, and Nikiforos Karamanis. 2006. A computer-aided environment for gener-ating multiple-choice test items. Nat. Lang. Eng. ,12(2):177–194. Hussein Mozannar, Valerie Chen, Mohammed Alsobay, Subhro Das, Sebastian Zhao, Dennis Wei, Manish Nagireddy, Prasanna Sattigeri, Ameet Talwalkar, and David Sontag. 2025. The realhumaneval: Evaluating large language models’ abilities to support program-mers. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Expert Certification. Jakob Nielsen. 1993. Usability engineering. In The Computer Science and Engineering Handbook .Kevin Pu, Daniel Lazaro, Ian Arawjo, Haijun Xia, Ziang Xiao, Tovi Grossman, and Yan Chen. 2025. Assis-tance or disruption? exploring and evaluating the design and trade-offs of proactive ai programming support. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pages 1–21. Romain Robbes, Théo Matricon, Thomas Degueule, Andre Hora, and Stefano Zacchiroli. 2026. Agentic much? adoption of coding agents on github. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. Just Accepted. Abbas Sabra, Olivier Schmitt, and Joseph Tyler. 2025. Assessing the quality and security of ai-generated code: A quantitative analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14727 .Anita Sarma and Nina Chen. 2024. Effective teach-ing through code reviews: Patterns and anti-patterns. 

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. , 1(FSE). Anshul Shah, Anya Chernova, Elena Tomson, Leo Porter, William G Griswold, and Adalbert Gerald Soosai Raj. 2025. Students’ use of github copilot for working with large code bases. In Proceedings of the 56th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 , pages 1050–1056. Judy Hanwen Shen and Alex Tamkin. 2026. How ai impacts skill formation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20245 .Shannon Zejiang Shen, Valerie Chen, Ken Gu, Alexis Ross, Zixian Ma, Jillian Ross, Alex Gu, Chenglei Si, Wayne Chi, Andi Peng, Jocelyn J Shen, Ameet Talwalkar, Tongshuang Wu, and David Sontag. 2026. Scaling collaborative effort with agents. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 12254–12271, San Diego, Califor-nia, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chenglei Si, Yanzhe Zhang, Ryan Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Ruibo Liu, and Diyi Yang. 2025. Design2Code: Benchmarking multimodal code generation for au-tomated front-end engineering. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3956–3974, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Akshit Sinha, Arvindh Arun, Shashwat Goel, Steffen Staab, and Jonas Geiping. 2025. The illusion of di-minishing returns: Measuring long horizon execution in LLMs. In First Workshop on Multi-Turn Interac-tions in Large Language Models .Samvrit Srinath, Annapurna Vadaparty, David HSmith IV, Leo Porter, and Daniel Zingaro. 2025. As-sessing problem decomposition in cs1 for the genai era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.05764 .Joschka Strüber, Ilze Amanda Auzina, Shashwat Goel, Susanne Keller, Jonas Geiping, Ameya Prabhu, and Matthias Bethge. 2025. Measuring belief updates in curious agents. In ICML 2025 Workshop on Assess-ing World Models .Kesler Tanner, Naomi Johnson, and James A Landay. 2019. Poirot: a web inspector for designers. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–12. Annapurna Vadaparty, Daniel Zingaro, David HSmith IV, Mounika Padala, Christine Alvarado, Jamie Gorson Benario, and Leo Porter. 2024. Cs1-llm: In-tegrating llms into cs1 instruction. In Proceedings of the 2024 on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education v. 1 , pages 297–303. Zora Zhiruo Wang, John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Alexa Tartaglini, Valerie Chen, Yuxiang Wei, Zijian Wang, Lingming Zhang, Karthik Narasimhan, Ludwig Schmidt, Graham Neubig, Daniel Fried, and Diyi Yang. 2026. Position: Hu-mans are missing from ai coding agent research. 

https://zorazrw.github.io/files/ position-haicode.pdf . Preprint. Marvin Wyrich, Justus Bogner, and Stefan Wagner. 2023. 40 years of designing code comprehension experiments: A systematic mapping study. ACM computing surveys , 56(4):1–42. Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Automated program repair in the era of large pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the 45th International Conference on Software En-gineering , ICSE ’23, page 1482–1494. IEEE Press. Litao Yan, Alyssa Hwang, Zhiyuan Wu, and Andrew Head. 2024. Ivie: Lightweight anchored explana-tions of just-generated code. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pages 1–15. Litao Yan, Jeffrey Tao, Lydia B Chilton, and Andrew Head. 2025. Answering developer questions with annotated agent-discovered program traces. In Pro-ceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , pages 1–14. Dayu Yang, Tianyang Liu, Daoan Zhang, Antoine Simoulin, Xiaoyi Liu, Yuwei Cao, Zhaopu Teng, Xin Qian, Grey Yang, Jiebo Luo, and Julian McAuley. 2025. Code to think, think to code: A survey on code-enhanced reasoning and reasoning-driven code intelligence in LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 2586–2616, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Andreas Zeller. 2009. Why programs fail: a guide to systematic debugging . Morgan Kaufmann. Alex L Zhang, Tim Kraska, and Omar Khattab. 2025. Recursive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24601 .Ashley Ge Zhang, Yan-Ru Jhou, Yinuo Yang, Shamita Rao, Maryam Arab, Yan Chen, and Steve Oney. 2026. Editrail: Understanding ai usage by visual-izing student-ai interaction in code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20085 .Sebastian Zhao, Alan Zhu, Hussein Mozannar, David Sontag, Ameet Talwalkar, and Valerie Chen. 2025. Codinggenie: A proactive llm-powered programming assistant. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Interna-tional Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering , pages 1168–1172. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2024. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36. Hongda Zhu, Yiwen Zhang, Bing Zhao, Jingzhe Ding, Siyao Liu, Tong Liu, Dandan Wang, Yanan Liu, and Zhaojian Li. 2025. Frontendbench: A benchmark for evaluating llms on front-end development via auto-matic evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13832 .A Appendix 

A.1 Case Study: Comprehension Questions 

We previously discussed VibeJam’s potential for generating personalized post-submission questions (§3.4), so we now empirically test it for code com-prehension (Maalej et al., 2014). Comprehension is often tested via manually-written code-specific questions (Wyrich et al., 2023), so we now examine whether LLM s can generate these questions auto-matically. Using the websites produced in §4.1, we generate 27 multi-select comprehension questions with GPT-5.2. The questions ask participants to se-lect 1) which features the website contains or does not contain; and 2) which JavaScript functions are present or absent. Our manual review confirms that 

all generated questions are factually accurate. Users have a mean accuracy of 0.76 (0.875 for website feature questions and 0.625 for JavaScript ones), while random chance is 0.50 , so our prelim-inary results show users may not fully comprehend code in agentic workflows. The accuracy/feasibility of automatic question generation, and preliminary evidence that these questions can reveal interesting coding behaviors, show that VibeJam’s personal-ized questions are a promising research direction. 

A.2 Prompts 

In Prompt A.1 and Prompt A.5, we provide our cus-tom prompts for generating summaries and follow-up ideas from agent executions, and personalizing questions based on a user’s codebase, respectively. Prompt A.1: Summary and Idea Generation Prompt (§3.2.1) You are an expert at summarizing actions that an AI assistant took after being prompted by a user and providing useful suggestions for the user to improve their code. This is what the user asked the assistant to do: <query> 

[insert user query] 

</query> These are the final versions of files after edits (only changed files included): <final_files> 

[insert final files] 

</final_files> These are the changes that the assistant made to the code (with optional SEARCH/REPLACE edit blocks when available): <changes> 

[insert edits] 

</changes> Using this information your job is to generate: 1. A summary of the changes that the assistant made to the code. 2. A list of ideas for the user to improve their code. <summary instructions> - The summary should be written in first person as if you were the one who made edits to the code. Use "I" as appropriate. - You must discuss which files were edited and the specific changes to each file. - Be subtle in how the changes address the user’s request; do not quote the user’s request. - Be concise. The summary should be a maximum of two sentences. </summary instructions> <idea instructions> - Generate 3 ideas with their corresponding probabilities, sampled from the full distribution. - Each idea should improve the code or the task: e.g. task fulfillment, correctness, style, readability, edge cases, or user experience, depending on what fits the project (web UI, Python script, etc.). - Only suggest ideas that are feasible given the file types and stack (e.g. for web: HTML/CSS/JS; for Python: standard library, tests, clarity). Do not suggest custom assets, external services, or out-of-scope changes. - Frame each idea as a follow-up action the user could ask for, i.e. a short command starting with a verb. - Be concise. Each idea should be no more than 10 words. </idea instructions> <format instructions> Generate your output as a json with two keys: 1) "summary" with a string value of the summary; 2) "ideas" with a list of strings value of the ideas; and 3) "probabilities" with a list of floats value of the probabilities of each idea based on your full distribution. "summary": "insert summary", "ideas": ["insert idea 1", "insert idea 2", "insert idea 3"], "probabilities": [float probability 1, float probability 2, float probability 3], Do not generate anything else </format instructions> Prompt A.2: Chat Mode Prompt (§3.2.1) You are VibeJam Chat Mode: a helpful coding assistant. You will receive a user’s question plus their current project files. Your job is to help the user by: - answering their question with respect to their code base - providing brief, relevant code snippets Hard rules (Chat Mode): - Do NOT apply edits, do NOT claim you changed files, do NOT output patch/search-replace blocks. - Do NOT output "SEARCH/REPLACE" or Aider-style replacement snippets. - Only respond in natural language and optional fenced code blocks. - If you include code, use fenced blocks with an appropriate language tag like “‘html, “‘css, “‘javascript. Encouragement: - If the users’ query indicates that they actually want to make edits automatically, suggest switching to Agent mode. User request: <user_request> 

[insert user prompt] </user_request> Current project file context (trimmed): <files_context> [insert files] </files_context> Prompt A.3: Plan Mode Prompt (§3.2.1) You are a planning assistant that writes and revises implementation plans for a request to implement a feature. User request: <user_request> 

[insert user query] 

</user_request> Here is the previous plan you may need to revise: <previous_plan> 

[insert prior plan, blank if nonexistent] 

</previous_plan> Current project file context (trimmed): <files_context> 

[insert files] 

</files_context> Instructions: - Return a full revised plan document in markdown. - If the previous plan is blank, create a complete first plan. - If the previous plan exists, integrate the new user request by revising it. - Keep the output implementation-focused and actionable. - Do not wrap the result in code fences. - Tailor the length of the plan based on the complexity of the request. Simpler requests can have shorter plans; complex requests can have longer plans - Eventually, this plan will be fed into a coding agent that will be tasked to execute all of the requests in the plan. So make sure that the plan is clear such that someone could follow it and then execute it. For this same reason, you only need to focus on implementation steps, not testing, etc. The format of the plan should be as follows: <format> ## Plan: [summarized tl;dr of feature request] #### Objective: [insert objective] #### Implementation Steps: 1. numbered list of steps ... n. #### Constraints and Notes: - bullet point list of steps ... </format> If you believe that any of these sections are not necessary, do not include them Prompt A.4: Plan Summarization Prompt (§3.2.1) You summarize how a markdown plan changed after a user request. User request: <user_request> 

[insert user query] 

</user_request> Previous plan: <previous_plan> 

[insert prior plan, blank if nonexistent] 

</previous_plan> Updated plan: <updated_plan> 

[insert current plan] 

</updated_plan> Rules: - Summarize only what was added, removed, or changed in the updated plan. - Do not propose follow-up ideas or next-step suggestions. - Keep it concise (max 3 short sentences). - Return plain text only. - Use first person to indicate that you wrote the plan. At the end of the summary, briefly hint that the user can either keep making adjustments to the plan or can hit "Build" to execute the plan Prompt A.5: Question Generation Prompt (§A.1) <task> Given the user’s HTML, CSS, and JavaScript code, generate five features that exist and five that do not but plausibly could. </task> <html> [insert HTML] </html> <css> [insert CSS] </css> <javascript> [insert JS] </javascript> <format> "real_features": ["...", ...], "fake_features": ["...", ...] </format>