Title: CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.32600v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 01:27:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 66

Markdown Content:
CUA-SWE / Preprint 

# CUA-SWE : W HEN COMPUTER -U SE AGENTS MEET VISUAL 

# SOFTWARE ENGINEERING 

Prince Zizhuang Wang 1,*,† , Chenhao Liang 2,* , Zelong Xu 3,* , Aojie Yuan 2,* , Xiaolin Zhou 4,* 

Haiyue Zhang 2, Yue Zhao 2, Xiyang Hu 4, Shuli Jiang 5

Corresponding author: princewang@cmu.edu 

*Equal contribution. †Project Lead. 

1Carnegie Mellon University 2University of Southern California 

3University of Wisconsin–Madison 4Arizona State University 5AWS Agentic AI 

## Abstract 

Software development requires more than editing code: developers repeatedly run software, interact with its interfaces, visually inspect its behavior, and use these observations to decide what to change next and whether a change works. Existing coding agents and computer-use agents are largely studied in isolation, leaving this integrated development process underexplored. Diagnosing a runtime interaction failure requires agents to connect visual observations with the responsible code, then use the application again to verify the repair. We introduce CUA-SWE, a benchmark, environment, and evaluation pipeline for software engineering with computer use. Beyond studying how GUI feedback supports diagnosis and repair, we ask whether agents can complete software engineering tasks when required specification or operational information is available only through the running application’s visual interface. CUA-SWE spans four software engineering domains and requires agents to modify code and configuration, execute commands, interact with running software, and inspect visual feedback within the same task. Each task includes deterministic, task-specific tests that verify whether the resulting software satisfies the requirements and preserves specified behavior. Our evaluation characterizes how frontier agents combine source-level execution with application screenshots and graphical interaction to produce verified software changes. We examine performance across domains and task information requirements, alongside the development behaviors associated with successful repairs. CUA-SWE provides a unified testbed for studying how agents use visual feedback and interaction to guide software engineering, with executable correctness criteria for the resulting software. 

GitHub Website Hugging Face Screenshot  

> Edit + Check
> Interact
> Revise
> Source code
> Buggy software
> Task Domains
> Independent
> Deterministic Verifier
> Pass Fail
> All tests pass + valid tool use
> Requested behavior
> Functionality preserved
> Feature A
> implement
> Bug B fixed
> Bug C fixed
> …
> API stability
> Performance criteria
> Feature criteria GPT-6-Astra Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 GPT-5.6-Sol Claude-Opus-4.8 GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Sonnet-5 GPT-5.6-Luna

020 40 60 Mean success (%) Code-only Hybrid CUA Difference (pp) GPT Claude Grok 11.3 59.9 

+48.6 

10.8 39.9 

+29.1 

10.2 41.9 

+31.7 

7.4 42.2 

+34.7 

5.0 35.9 

+30.8 

3.6 20.2 

+16.6 

3.8 19.6 

+15.8 

2.8 15.6 

+12.8 

Figure 1: CUA-SWE benchmark overview and Frontier agents performance. Left: Agents inspect screenshots, interact with applications, and edit code; independent tests check their repairs. Right: Mean task success of Code-only and Hybrid CUA agents across four equally weighted domains. Red labels show the Hybrid CUA gain in percentage points. 

1arXiv:2609.32600v1 [cs.AI] 26 Sep 2026 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

1 Introduction 

Developing interactive software requires an agent to use the software it writes. Source code and command output do not fully reveal what users see or what happens when they interact with an application (Yang et al., 2024b). An agent needs to run the software, operate its interface, and use visual clues to diagnose problems and guide code changes (Aggarwal & Welleck, 2025). It must then check how those changes affect the running software (Lu et al., 2025). In games, this requires observing behavior over time and checking responses to player input (Chi et al., 2026; Luo et al., 2026). Consider a platform game in which the character falls through a platform after jumping onto it. The game builds and starts, and a static screenshot may look correct. To diagnose the failure, an agent must play the game, observe the jump and landing, and connect that behavior to the movement or collision code. After editing the code, it must replay the jump and check that the character lands correctly while normal movement still works. Computer-use agents and coding agents approach software from complementary directions. Computer-use agents operate interfaces through visual observations and mouse and keyboard actions (Agashe et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025), while coding agents inspect repositories, edit files, and execute commands and tests (Yang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024). Their benchmarks typically assess either changes to a codebase (Jimenez et al., 2024; Miserendino et al., 2025) or the completion of user tasks in existing applications (Xie et al., 2024; Koh et al., 2024). Visual software benchmarks incorporate runtime feedback, but concentrate on particular development domains, such as user-facing JavaScript software and games (Yang et al., 2024b; Chi et al., 2026). Broader environments emphasize access to development tools through a visual IDE (Aggarwal & Welleck, 2025), or the orchestration of graphical and command-line interfaces across general workflows assessed by an agentic judge (Li et al., 2026). Together, these capabilities motivate two central questions: 

(1) How do agents use GUI feedback to diagnose, repair, and verify software? (2) Can agents complete software engineering tasks when required specification or operational information is available only through the running application’s visual interface? Visual observations can thus supply both feedback on an implementation and requirements that the agent must recover and translate into working code. Addressing these questions across software engineering domains calls for an environment that connects software use to source-code modification, together with a benchmark that verifies the resulting behavior. Deterministic tests provide reproducible checks of whether a change satisfies the task and preserves specified functionality. To address this challenge, we introduce CUA-SWE , a benchmark, interactive development environment, and evaluation pipeline for visual software engineering with computer-use agents, spanning web development, game development, mobile app development, and DevOps. Tasks focus on diagnosing, repairing, and verifying software behavior. Each task provides an editable project and running software that the agent can operate and visually inspect throughout development. To reflect how developers work, the environment lets agents choose when to inspect source code, execute commands, interact with the software, examine screenshots, and revise their implementation. Coding and computer use are available within the same development episode: visual observations can guide code changes, and subsequent interaction lets the agent inspect their effects. CUA-SWE provides deterministic evaluation with verifiable task outcomes. Each task specifies the behavior to implement or repair and the existing functionality that must be preserved. Task-specific tests execute the modified software in a controlled setting, using interaction sequences and assertions on the rendered interface or runtime state to verify the requested behavior and detect regressions. The environment also supports a code-only condition in which agents inspect and edit source, execute permitted builds, tests, and custom scripts, and read their outputs. Hybrid CUA adds screenshots and graphical interaction with the running application. The same task requirements and protected tests apply to both conditions, allowing us to measure development with source-level execution and with additional application access through its GUI. Our contributions are: • An environment for software development through coordinated coding and computer use. Agents work with editable projects, development commands, mouse and keyboard actions, and screenshot observations. Visual runtime evidence connects rendered behavior to code changes, and subsequent interaction lets agents check the effects of their edits. • A benchmark with deterministic evaluation and verifiable outcomes. Across four software engineering domains, tasks connect visually observable application behavior to an implementation or repair requirement and define the existing functionality to preserve. Independent tests verify the resulting software through execution and interaction, providing consistent criteria for task success. 

> 2

CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Web • Clipped chart • Misaligned UI • Interaction bug   

> Game • Collision error • Animation • Gameplay bug Mobile • Identity mix-up • State error • Touch bug
> Independent Deterministic Verifier
> Editable source-code repository
> Code-only Agent
> CUA-SWE Task Package Matched comparison: same task, different access Shared evaluator-private

CUA-SWE: Visual Software Engineering with Computer-Use Agents   

> Apply permitted edits to a clean baseline Rebuild application Run task-specific tests Pass Fail All tests pass + valid tool use Bug report: •Requested behavior • Functionality preserved
> DevOps • Trace errors • Alert logic • Metrics & logs
> Requested behavior Functionality preserved
> Feature A implement Bug B fixed Bug C fixed …
> API stability Performance criteria Feature criteria
> Hybrid CUA + CLI agent
> CLI access only
> Read code Edit files Run commands
> GUI access View Screenshot Click and type Scroll and swipe
> CLI access only
> Read code Edit files Run commands

Figure 2: The CUA-SWE development and evaluation pipeline. 

• An evaluation of frontier models and coding agents. We evaluate a broad range of frontier models and coding agents on CUA-SWE and characterize task success across domains and application families, including tasks that require recovering specification or operational information from the running application’s visual interface and translating it into working software. The code-only reference includes nonvisual execution and command feedback; hybrid CUA additionally provides application screenshots and graphical actions. We examine this comparison by task information requirements and use trajectories to study how agents connect execution feedback and visual observations to implementation and verification. 

2 When CUA Meets Visual Software Engineering 

The computer-use channel exposes the rendered application through screenshots and graphical actions, while coding tools provide direct source access. This observation boundary makes interpreting the visible interface and choosing actions part of the measured capability. Structured DOM, HTTP, and application-state queries would supply a different observation channel; the benchmark’s visual condition measures development through the interface presented to the agent. 

Problem Formulation. For task u, the agent receives an instruction Iu, an editable codebase c0

u, and access to its running application through screenshots and graphical actions. The task also defines a deterministic verifier Vu that checks whether a submitted codebase satisfies the requested functionality, preserves designated existing behavior, and respects constraints on permitted changes. The agent interacts with the development environment within a finite action budget and produces a final codebase cT , where T is the number of actions taken before submission or budget exhaustion. We denote its changes relative to c0

u by ∆c. We model the interaction as a finite-horizon partially observable Markov decision process 

Mu = ( Su, A , O, Pu, Ωu, Ru), where Su, A , and O are the state, action, and observation spaces; Pu and Ωu are the transition and observation models; and Ru is the terminal repair reward determined by Vu.

State and observation. At step t, the environment state is st = ( ct , xt , bt ) ∈ Su, where ct is the current codebase (with 

c0 = c0

u), xt is the complete runtime state of the development environment and running application, and bt is the remaining action budget. The agent does not observe st directly. Instead, it receives an observation ot ∈ O containing requested file contents, command output, or screenshots of the running application. Screenshots provide visual runtime evidence about the rendered interface and its response to interaction. These observations give a partial view of execution: the visible effect of a code change can depend on prior inputs and whether the application has loaded the edit. After action at ∈ A , the environment evolves according to st+1 ∼ Pu(· | st , at ) and returns ot+1 ∼ Ωu(· | st+1, at ).

Action space, verification, and reward. The agent can modify the project, operate the software, or submit its work. We define the agent’s action space as follows: A = Acoding ∪ Acomputer ∪ { finish }. Acoding contains commands for inspecting 

3CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

and editing code and running development tools. Acomputer contains screenshot observation, mouse and keyboard input, and application controls such as navigation and resizing. The finish action terminates the episode and submits the final codebase 

cT for verification. The complete interface is given in Appendix B.2. For a candidate codebase c, patch correctness combines three binary checks, Vu(c) = V task 

u (c) ∧ V reg 

u (c) ∧ V perm 

u (c). Here V task 

u checks the requested implementation or repair, V reg 

u checks designated existing functionality for regressions, and V perm 

u checks that the modifications to c0

u

respect the task’s restrictions on permitted changes. Behavioral checks use controlled execution, interaction sequences, and assertions over runtime or rendered application state. For evaluation episode i on task u, we write Pi = Vu(cTi ) for patch correctness. A separate trajectory check Ui evaluates the episode’s tool access and observation evidence under its assigned condition. The reported task outcome is Si = PiUi; Section 4.1 specifies its aggregation. The terminal repair reward is 

Ru(sT ) = Vu(cT ) ∈ { 0, 1}, which supplies the correctness signal for post-training (Section 4.4). 

Policy and objective. Let ht = ( o0, a0, . . . , ot−1, at−1, ot ) denote the interaction history. A vision-language policy with parameters θ selects actions conditioned on the instruction and the interaction history, at ∼ πθ (· | Iu, ht ). The same policy selects coding actions from Acoding and computer-use actions from Acomputer , allowing visual runtime evidence from application interaction to guide subsequent edits. The objective is to maximize the expected terminal reward 

Eπθ ,Pu,Ωu [Ru(sT )] , where the expectation is over the policy’s actions and the resulting environment interactions. Because the reward is binary, this objective maximizes the probability that the final codebase passes verification. 

3 The CUA-SWE benchmark Source Editable project     

> Application Running game: Captain Callisto
> Reset Level 3, seed 45
> >_ Code and terminal Mouse, keys, screenshots

## Agent          

> screenshot
> edit code
> Hold D
> JS cargo_contract.js ×···
> 127 const routeRecord = routeRecords.find((record) => 128 !shadowAliases.includes(cargoRecordValue( record, 'alias-'))) || 129 routeRecords[0] || null; src / cargo_contract.js UTF-8 JavaScript

Step 1 ( nothing collected) Step 2 (1 pickup, 2 counted) ✔✘ Correct behavior 

> screenshot

Task Instruction Task Environment Toolset 

> Fix the inventory mismatch after a pickup. Replay collection and normal level completion.
> Trajectory audit

Independent evaluation 

Episode Record              

> { } GUI
> Behavioral checks
> Hold (2.0 s + 1.8 s)
> “...the active route/map pair intentionally has two matching rows.”
> D
> Expected Primary Secondary
> Cargo removed 12
> Inventory added 12
> At completion 2/2 3/3
> “The first is a shadowed decoy …” “…reject aliases shadowed for the currently active selectors...”
> code patch screenshots action log Verifier Report

Figure 3: A concrete benchmark task: repairing inventory updates in Captain Callisto. Agents combine coding tools with interaction and screenshot observations. In Captain Callisto, one pickup incorrectly changes the inventory from 0/2 to 2/2. The code excerpt shows the agent’s final edit, while “Correct behavior” shows a separate reference replay. Independent evaluation checks both the protected behavioral tests and the validity of tool use. The table lists expected outcomes for two replay scenarios. We construct the benchmark around three principles. First, tasks should expose visual runtime evidence that is relevant to software development through the computer-use interface. Second, repair correctness should be determined independently of the agent’s trajectory by executing Vu on the submitted codebase cT . Third, the construction process should support controlled variations in task demands so that the benchmark can probe where hybrid coding and computer-use agents succeed or fail. We use LLM-assisted task authoring to scale this process, but admit a task only after human review and executable validation of its requirement, runtime behavior, reference solution, and verifier. We then use reviewed construction-time agent trials to identify useful variations in difficulty. 

4CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task Instruction Task Environment Toolset     

> Repair Campus Pocket’s imported routes. Respect access rules and preserve saved trips.
> Source Editable project
> Application Campus Pocket (mobile web)
> Scene Harbor Court / step-free on
> Campus Pocket
> >_ Code and terminal Mouse, keys, screenshots

↖

Step 1 Read the provider’s link report Step 2 Inspect the suggested route  

> H6 lift is closed; travel cost differs from plan 16 m route uses the closed H6 lift

Reference replay   

> 74 m via H3, H4 and H5
> JS routing.js gold excerpt if (link.state !== 'open' || (stepFree && link.access !== 'step-free')) continue; const distance = Number(link.travel_m); if (link.flow === 'both') // add the reverse arc
> Reference repair (selected lines; reverse-arc comment added)
> screenshot
> screenshot Open report edit code

Agent 

Local replay checks         

> Observed behavior
> Replay check Base Gold
> Route length 16 m 74 m Closed H6 Used Avoided Save / reload Pass Pass
> Replay audit
> Harbor Court; Gate to Library. Enable step-free; save and reload. Closed H6 drops out of the route. 22 + 38 + 14 = 74 m. Full native verifier not rerun.

Replay Record     

> { } reference patch screenshots replay script

Replay check record  

> Fresh original-app / gold replays. Agent loop illustrates available tools, not a recorded agent run.
> Provider detail Route detail

Figure 4: Mobile example: repairing imported routes in Campus Pocket. The provider report identifies a closed lift and the travel costs used to construct a step-free route. The faulty route uses the closed H6 lift; the reference repair follows H3, H4, and H5 for a total of 74 m. The figure shows original-application and reference replays, with local route and persistence checks. Its agent loop illustrates the available tools. 

3.1 Tasks and domain coverage 

CUA-SWE contains 105 tasks spanning four software engineering domains: 36 Web, 29 Game, 20 DevOps, and 20 Mobile tasks. Each task instantiates the same interface described in Section 2: the agent receives Iu and c0

u, can modify the project through Acoding , and, in the computer-use setting, can observe and operate the running software through Acomputer .We select these domains because they expose different relationships between runtime observations and implementation changes. Web tasks emphasize visual layout, geometry, and interaction state; Game tasks involve motion, timing, and state transitions; DevOps tasks connect service-level observations to configuration and processing logic; and Mobile tasks couple displayed interface behavior with application state. Tasks are adapted from open-source applications and documented software behaviors or built as purpose-designed applications when controlled behavior is needed. Appendix A.7 describes the sources and adaptations, and Appendix D lists the tasks. 

Specification basis. Tasks also differ in where their requirements are specified. In source-specified (S) tasks, the instruction and readable project code define the target behavior. Application-material-dependent (M) tasks require interpreting additional application materials, such as imported drawings, service contracts, or graphical reference cards. These labels record specification provenance; diagnosis, implementation, and verification are required in both groups. For example, the gear task’s drawing specifies component relationships, while the submitted repair must realize those relationships in the moving preview and preserve phase editing, undo, and reload behavior. Appendix A.3 defines the categories, and Appendix D records each task’s specification basis. 

3.2 Task construction and validation 

From runtime behavior to a task specification. We begin with a concrete software behavior that can be reproduced in the running application and whose implementation can be modified in the codebase. From this seed, an LLM author constructs the instruction Iu, initial codebase c0

u, reproducible runtime setup, gold reference repair, plausible negative repairs, and protected behavioral tests implementing Vu. The author also specifies an interaction sequence that exposes behavior relevant to the task through the agent’s available observations. Human review checks that the instruction describes an externally meaningful development requirement, that the initial software exhibits the intended problem, and that relevant runtime evidence is observable through the benchmark interface. This step connects the task specification to the partial observations 

ot available to the agent rather than relying on information that is visible only to the benchmark author. For example, in the Captain Callisto task in Figure 3, collecting one item changes the visible inventory counter from (0/2) directly to (2/2). The task instruction asks the agent to repair this behavior while preserving normal item collection and level completion. The agent can reproduce the fault through game controls and observe its effect in screenshots before modifying the code. 

5CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task Instruction Task Environment Toolset     

> Keep a cleared date empty after blur. Invalid nonempty input keeps the prior date.
> Source Editable project
> Application Appointment booking form
> Scene Masked date input
> Date UI
> >_ Code and terminal Mouse, keys, screenshots

↖      

> Step 1 Select the appointment date Step 2 Clear the mask, then blur
> Selected date: 12/25/2024 Field empty; selected date: None
> Reference replay
> Gold replay also stays empty
> JS DatePickerField.jsx gold excerpt if (!hasDateCharacters && selected) { onChange(null);
> Reference repair (selected source lines)
> screenshot
> screenshot Clear / blur edit code

Agent 

Reference validation     

> Required behavior
> Case Required
> Clear + blur Stay empty Selected label None Invalid text Keep date
> Replay audit
> Select date; clear input; blur. Try invalid nonempty text. Published agent frames show None after clear and blur. Gold replay shows the same cleared state.

Replay Record      

> { } reference patch screenshots replay script Replay record
> Published agent and gold frames. Agent loop illustrates available tools; exact sources in notes.
> Appointment booking Appointment booking

Figure 5: Web example: preserving distinct masked-date input behaviors. Clearing the appointment date and leaving the field should remove the selection, while invalid nonempty input should preserve the previous date. The published agent frames and reference replay show the cleared state. The source excerpt is from the reference repair; the agent loop illustrates the coding and interaction interface. 

Constructing an independent verifier. For each task, we validate the reference repair c⋆

u and the deterministic verifier Vu

defined in Section 2. At minimum, we require Vu(c0

u) = 0 and Vu(c⋆

u) = 1 so that the verifier distinguishes the original faulty program from a known correct implementation. The verifier combines checks of the requested behavior V task 

u , preserved functionality V reg 

u , and permitted modifications V perm 

u . Behavioral checks execute the submitted program under controlled interaction sequences and may assert properties of the rendered interface, runtime behavior, or internal application state. Correctness therefore depends on the behavior of cT , rather than on matching the reference patch. We further test the verifier with plausible incomplete or incorrect repairs. These negative repairs target common ways of satisfying only part of the requirement and must remain rejected by Vu. For example, clearing a masked date field should remove the selected date, whereas entering an invalid date should preserve the current selection. A repair that clears the selection in both cases should fail verification. Gold and negative repairs therefore serve different roles: the former establishes that a correct repair exists, while the latter tests whether the verifier discriminates the intended behavior from plausible partial fixes. 

Validating the interactive development path. A valid verifier alone does not establish that a task is suitable for computer-use software engineering. We therefore replay the relevant runtime interactions and check that the behavior needed to understand the task can be exposed through the benchmark interface. We verify that the application can be driven to the intended state, that relevant visual observations are available, that code changes can take effect during development, and that verification remains reproducible from a clean project state. This validation deliberately separates information available during development from information used for evaluation. The agent reasons from its instruction Iu and interaction history 

ht , including source, command output, and screenshots, whereas the evaluator may use privileged application state when executing Vu(cT ). For example, a game task may present only the rendered board to the agent while the verifier directly inspects the underlying board state. This allows evaluation to remain deterministic without exposing privileged information to the agent. Appendix B.3 gives further verifier examples. 

3.3 Capability-oriented task expansion 

Construction-time trials. After a task passes the preceding validation stages, we use construction-time agent trials to calibrate its difficulty and identify related task variants. These trials do not determine correctness (all candidate solutions are still judged by the fixed verifier Vu), but they reveal whether a task is trivial, beyond the tested agent’s effective operating range, or informative about a particular failure mode. Appendix A.8 details this construction and expansion loop (see Figure 8). Controlled variants. When a task admits controlled variation, we construct related tasks by changing a specific development demand while retaining the underlying application and repair lineage. Examples include increasing the geometric complexity of a selection problem, extending the temporal dependency of a runtime state, or requiring an additional interaction condition to be preserved. Each variant receives its own instruction Iu, initial codebase c0

u, and verifier 

6CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Vu, and must independently pass the same human review and executable validation described above. Task families. This process produces task families with related semantics but different development demands. Rather than assigning a scalar difficulty label, the families allow us to examine where agent performance changes as a particular requirement becomes more demanding. They also provide a mechanism for extending CUA-SWE as hybrid computer-use agents improve. Construction trials are used only during benchmark development; the released task instructions, initial codebases, runtime conditions, and protected verifiers are fixed before the evaluations reported in Section 4. Additional construction details and task-family definitions appear in Appendices A.8 and H, respectively. 

4 Experiments 

We study how agents use GUI feedback during software repair and whether they can complete development tasks whose required specification or operational information is available only through the running application’s visual interface. Task success measures the resulting implementation; information annotations and trajectory analyses distinguish the demands of acquiring requirements, diagnosing behavior, and implementing a repair.  

> 4.1 Experimental setup

Tasks and agents. We evaluate frontier computer-use agents and harness systems such as Codex and Claude Code on our CUA-SWE benchmark. Full evaluated model list can be found in G. Table 1 reports the single-attempt comparison with code-only and hybrid CUA agents. Appendix F, Table 4, reports a three-attempt hybrid CUA evaluation of GPT-6-Astra, GPT-5.6-Sol, and Claude-Fable-5 on the same task collections. 

Coding and Hyrbird CUA. Both conditions allow agents to inspect and edit project source, execute permitted builds, available tests, and custom scripts, and inspect their outputs. The code-only condition thus includes nonvisual execution feedback. Hybrid CUA additionally provides screenshots and graphical interaction with the running application, including its displayed state and materials. Agents choose when to execute code, observe the interface, interact, and check their changes. Both conditions use the same public task instructions and protected patch tests. Appendix A.2 details the access rules and gives a source-level execution example. Codex and Claude Code are evaluated in the CUA condition. 

Metrics. For episode i on task u, patch correctness is Pi = Vu(cTi ), combining the functionality, regression, and permitted-change checks defined in Section 2. The trajectory indicator Ui checks tool access and observation evidence under the assigned condition. The task outcome is Si = PiUi. Within each domain, all models follow the same condition-specific scoring rules (Appendix A.1). For evaluation set E , we report task success as TSR = 100 |E |−1 ∑i∈E PiUi. Appendix N reports patch correctness, task success, and the proportion of passing patches with Ui = 0 for each model and access condition. The four-domain mean gives Web, Game, DevOps, and Mobile equal weights. Table 1 uses one attempt per task. In Table 4, pass@1 uses these same first-attempt outcomes, while pass@3 counts tasks solved in the first or either of two additional attempts. Their difference measures the task coverage added by those attempts. Appendix A.6 defines development-time and workload measures.  

> 4.2 Frontier performance and computer-use access

Broad competence across domains. GPT-6-Astra leads the four-domain comparison (Figure 1), with 59.9% mean task success, 17.7 percentage points above GPT-5.6-Sol. It also achieves the highest observed hybrid success within every domain. Its advantage spans graphical editing, game state, service behavior, and mobile application integration. The task-level results locate this lead more precisely: Canvas interactions after geometry changes and the recovery of exact gear and sprite relationships distinguish it from other strong agents. Table 1 summarizes these models; Appendix G provides the complete results, and Appendix H shows their distribution across task families. 

Code-only versus hybrid CUA. Hybrid CUA combines source-level execution with application screenshots and GUI interaction (Figure 1). Every frontier model in the four-domain comparison achieves higher aggregate task success with hybrid access; GPT-6-Astra gains 48.6 percentage points. The gains concentrate on tasks whose requirements include application materials; source-specified subsets have near-zero domain-average changes and substantial variation across models (Appendix I). This comparison measures completing visual software engineering tasks through the provided access conditions. In material-dependent tasks, agents must recover requirements from drawings or displayed behavior, implement them, and preserve the surrounding workflow. Source-level execution tests the implementation; application observations 

> 7CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Table 1: Single-attempt task success (%) across four domains. Code denotes code-only access; hybrid CUA adds screenshots and graphical actions. Teal marks column maxima; an em dash indicates no reported result. Full results: Appendix G, Table 8. 

Web Game DevOps Mobile Model Code Hybrid CUA Code Hybrid CUA Code Hybrid CUA Code Hybrid CUA GPT-6-Astra 27.8 66.7 17.2 37.9 0.0 80.0 0.0 55.0 

GPT-5.6-Sol 19.4 58.3 10.3 10.3 0.0 55.0 0.0 45.0 Claude-Opus-5 22.2 55.6 13.8 20.7 0.0 60.0 — —Claude-Opus-4.8 16.7 27.8 3.4 20.7 0.0 55.0 0.0 40.0 Claude-Sonnet-5 8.3 0.0 6.9 3.4 0.0 40.0 0.0 35.0 Claude-Fable-5 19.4 47.2 13.8 17.2 5.0 55.0 5.0 40.0 Grok-4.6 30.6 55.6 10.3 17.2 0.0 65.0 0.0 30.0 

supply requirements and feedback that those executions alone may not expose. The following analysis examines how agents turn this evidence into verified repairs under hybrid access. 

4.3 Development behavior and reliability 

Following the consequences of a code change. The nested-selection task separates fixing a visible defect from preserving the interaction that follows it. GPT-6-Astra first repairs resizing, then drags the object beyond its containing frame. When selection is lost, it extends hit testing to selectable descendants and repeats the interaction. GPT-5.6-Sol and Claude-Opus-5 repair the resize behavior but leave the selection defect in their submitted patches. The paired outcomes therefore identify a concrete advantage: using feedback after an edit to uncover and repair a second, connected behavior. Appendix M traces the observations, changes, and verifier outcomes. 

Recovering relations and translating them into behavior. On the Mobile gear task, GPT-6-Astra reconstructs all 23 driving relations and implements their angle, phase, and editing behavior. GPT-5.6-Sol instead chooses the wrong driving rim at two compound assemblies, causing the implemented motion to depart from the drawing. A similar distinction appears in sprite animation: GPT-6-Astra recovers the complete pose sequence, whereas GPT-5.6-Terra’s near-complete reconstruction retains incorrect pose assignments. In DevOps, GPT-6-Astra uniquely solves the gauge-calibration task by probing endpoint behavior and updating the inferred mode when the deployment changes. These cases connect its lead to precise recovery of relationships and operating rules, followed by implementation of their consequences across application interactions. 0 4 8 12 16 Mean agent time (min) 020 40 60 70 Mean task success (%)  GPT-6-Astra Claude-Fable-5 GPT-5.6-Sol Claude-Opus-4.8 Grok-4.6 GPT-5.6-Luna Claude-Sonnet-5 GPT-5.6-Terra Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol         

> (a) Four-domain success and time 025 50 75 100 GPT-6-Astra responses 025 50 75 100 Peer model responses Equal responses
> GPT-6-Astra uses fewer responses: Grok-4.6: 83.3% Claude-Opus-5: 72.2% (b) Interaction on shared successes

Figure 6: Success, time, and interaction effort. (a) Task success rates and mean episode times for nine models and systems, averaged equally across the four domains (circles: frontier models; open square: Codex). Appendix A.6 specifies resource coverage and aggregation. (b) Completed responses on the same Web tasks solved by both GPT-6-Astra and each peer (18 tasks per comparison); above the diagonal, GPT-6-Astra uses fewer responses. 

> 8CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Success and development effort. Figure 6(a) places task coverage alongside mean development time. GPT-6-Astra’s higher success than GPT-5.6-Sol accompanies a mean episode time of 4.3 rather than 3.7 minutes, combining broader coverage with a modest increase in time per attempt. Its broader coverage is accompanied by economical interaction on tasks that its peers also solve. It uses fewer responses on 83.3% of shared Web successes with Grok-4.6 and 72.2% with Claude-Opus-5 (Figure 6(b)). Each comparison holds the completed task set fixed. Broader task coverage thus coexists with fewer interaction rounds on shared successes. The repair traces show how individual observations inform subsequent edits and checks. Appendix K retains the task-level effort pairs, and Appendix L reports the broader workload profiles. (a) Training loss    

> 110 −3
> 10 −6
> 0900 1800 Updates Raw Mean (50)
> (b) Pass (%)
> 050 100
> 11.1
> Base
> 33.3
> SFT

Figure 7: SFT performance on Web domain. (a) Batch loss and its 50-update mean (log scale). (b) Native-verifier pass rate, one greedy attempt per task. 

Capability boundaries and reliability. Reliable repairs require agents to coordinate coupled state and recover relations that re-main valid across subsequent interactions. Core Ball exposes event-ordering demands, while Mobile schedule tasks require accurate reconstruction of dense dependencies; local corrections can leave connected behaviors unresolved (Appendix M.1). Re-peated attempts distinguish stable competence from additional task coverage. In the three-attempt Game study, GPT-6-Astra solves 34.5% of tasks in all three attempts, compared with 3.4% for GPT-5.6-Sol. On Mobile, later attempts add a sprite repair for GPT-5.6-Sol and a schedule repair for GPT-6-Astra. Thus retries broaden coverage, while consistency across attempts captures how reliably agents complete these interacting requirements. Ap-pendix F gives the full repeated-attempt results and uncertainty estimates.  

> 4.4 Supervised post-training

Learning from verified development trajectories. CUA-SWE also supplies supervision for hybrid development. We fine-tune Qwen3.8-27B on action prefixes from verified reference replays with a 27/9 train/test split, and evaluate the base and final checkpoints on the held-out tasks, with one greedy attempt per task and matched interaction settings. The native-verifier pass rate rises from 11.1% to 33.3% after SFT (Figure 7). SFT on gold-patch replays trains the model to reproduce reference repairs, providing early positive indications of a learning signal. This measure is patch correctness Pi;benchmark task success additionally checks trajectory validity Ui. Appendix E.2 preserves the full training configuration, loss summaries, and evaluation details. 

Extension to RLVR. Our immediate future work is to establish whether CUA-SWE provides a verifiable learning signal and to develop scalable RLVR training in this environment. The executable verifiers can score newly sampled development episodes, supplying rewards for sequences of coding and computer use, while parallel application workspaces support rollout collection. Appendix E.3 specifies the RLVR objective and rollout interface. 

5 Related work 

Software engineering and coding benchmarks. HumanEval, LiveCodeBench, and BigCodeBench test program synthesis and execution (Chen et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2024; Zhuo et al., 2025); SWE-bench, SWE-bench Pro, and SWE-Lancer assess repository changes and professional development tasks (Jimenez et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2025; Miserendino et al., 2025). Terminal-Bench extends evaluation to complex command-line workflows (Merrill et al., 2026). CUA-SWE connects software changes to runtime observations and graphical interaction, with deterministic tests of the resulting behavior. 

Computer-use benchmarks and agents. Mind2Web, WebArena, and VisualWebArena study web interaction (Deng et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Koh et al., 2024); OSWorld, Windows Agent Arena, and AndroidWorld cover desktop and mobile workflows (Xie et al., 2024; Bonatti et al., 2024; Rawles et al., 2024). Agent S2, UI-TARS, and OpenCUA develop planning, grounding, and learned policies for computer use (Agashe et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025). CUA-SWE studies these capabilities within development, where agents use software to inform and check their own code changes. Connecting coding and computer use. Programming with Pixels combines visual IDE interaction, coding tools, and programmatic verification (Aggarwal & Welleck, 2025). WeaveBench evaluates hybrid GUI, CLI, and coding workflows through a trajectory-aware agentic judge (Li et al., 2026). CUA-SWE focuses on software engineering across four domains, providing deterministic correctness criteria for evaluation and verifiable feedback for post-training. 

> 9CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Appendix O extends these comparisons to visual software development, agent interfaces, and training data. 

6 Limitations 

The initial SFT study offers early positive indications of a learning signal from gold-patch replays (Section 4.4). Establishing whether the environment provides a verifiable learning signal and developing scalable RLVR training remain immediate future work. This requires efficient parallel rollout collection, stable optimization over long multimodal trajectories, and effective credit assignment across code edits, observations, and interactions. Appendix E.3 specifies an objective based on executable task feedback. The current benchmark spans Web, Game, DevOps, and Mobile. Expanding to more domains, applications, and tasks will broaden its coverage of visual software engineering. Future extensions can include richer development workflows and longer tasks that require agents to coordinate coding and computer use across multiple tools and applications. 

7 Conclusion 

CUA-SWE is a benchmark, environment, and evaluation pipeline for visual software engineering across Web, Game, DevOps, and Mobile. It connects code editing and execution with screenshots, GUI actions, and deterministic verification. Comparing code-only and hybrid CUA agents, our evaluation examines how agents use visual runtime evidence to diagnose and repair software and recover requirements supplied through application interfaces. CUA-SWE supports measuring and expanding agents’ ability to translate this evidence into verified software changes. 

AI use statement 

AI tools assisted with writing, literature searches, code inspection, conceptual and experimental design, result interpretation, and figure and table preparation. An image-generation model assisted with figure layout studies. Application screenshots and code excerpts in the figures come from the tasks and recorded runs. The authors are responsible for the manuscript’s claims, citations, and experimental evidence. 

Reproducibility statement 

Sections 2 and 3 describe the environment, tasks, and tests. Section 2 specifies the problem formulation. Section 4.4 reports supervised post-training; Appendix E.1 describes SFT data construction, Appendix E.2 gives the training configuration, and Appendices E.3–E.4 describe the RLVR extension. Appendix B documents the implementation and example tests, and Appendix D lists all tasks. Section 4.1 defines the experimental conditions and metrics; Appendix A describes the evaluation protocol, condition comparisons, and workload accounting. Appendix F specifies repeated-attempt metrics and statistical resampling. Figure 7 reports the SFT loss history and training-task verifier outcomes for the base and trained checkpoints. 

Ethics statement 

The tasks use locally hosted applications and games, including original examples and code adapted from existing projects. Distributing this material requires preserving source and asset attribution. Evaluation tests are kept separate from the agent’s editable files to prevent changes to the scoring procedure. The study does not measure human performance. Passing the benchmark tests does not guarantee that a change is safe to deploy. 

> 10 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

References 

Saaket Agashe, Kyle Wong, Vincent Tu, Jiachen Yang, Ang Li, and Xin Eric Wang. Agent S2: A compositional generalist-specialist framework for computer use agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00906 , 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2504.00906 .Pranjal Aggarwal and Sean Welleck. Programming with pixels: Can computer-use agents do software engineering? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18525 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18525v2 .Rogerio Bonatti, Dan Zhao, Francesco Bonacci, Dillon Dupont, Sara Abdali, Yinheng Li, Yadong Lu, Justin Wagle, Kazuhito Koishida, Arthur Bucker, Lawrence Jang, and Zack Hui. Windows Agent Arena: Evaluating Multi-Modal OS Agents at Scale, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.08264 .Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374 .Wayne Chi, Yixiong Fang, Arnav Yayavaram, Siddharth Yayavaram, Seth Karten, Qiuhong Anna Wei, Runkun Chen, Alexander Wang, Valerie Chen, Ameet Talwalkar, and Chris Donahue. GameDevBench: Evaluating agentic capabilities through game development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11103 , 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.11103 .Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Mind2Web: Towards a Generalist Agent for the Web, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.06070 .Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer, Andrew Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, Karmini Sampath, Maya Krishnan, Srivatsa Kundurthy, Sean Hendryx, Zifan Wang, Vijay Bharadwaj, Jeff Holm, Raja Aluri, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Noah Jacobson, Bing Liu, and Brad Kenstler. SWE-Bench Pro: Can AI Agents Solve Long-Horizon Software Engineering Tasks?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.16941 .Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. WebVoyager: Building an End-to-End Web Agent with Large Multimodal Models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2401.13919 .Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. LiveCodeBench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974 , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07974 .Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770 .Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Chong Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham Neubig, Shuyan Zhou, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. VisualWebArena: Evaluating multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.50. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.50/ .Kaixin Li, Ziyang Meng, Hongzhan Lin, Ziyang Luo, Yuchen Tian, Jing Ma, Zhiyong Huang, and Tat-Seng Chua. ScreenSpot-Pro: GUI Grounding for Professional High-Resolution Computer Use, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2504.07981 .

> 11 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Wanli Li, Bowen Zhou, Yunyao Yu, Zhou Xu, Yifan Yang, Dongsheng Li, and Caihua Shan. WeaveBench: A long-horizon, real-world benchmark for computer-use agents with hybrid interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.09426 , 2026. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.09426v3 .Wei Li, William Bishop, Alice Li, Chris Rawles, Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, Divya Tyamagundlu, and Oriana Riva. On the Effects of Data Scale on UI Control Agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03679 .Zimu Lu, Yunqiao Yang, Houxing Ren, Haotian Hou, Han Xiao, Ke Wang, Weikang Shi, Aojun Zhou, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. WebGen-Bench: Evaluating LLMs on generating interactive and functional websites from scratch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03733 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03733 .Tongxu Luo, Rongsheng Wang, Jiaxi Bi, Chenming Xu, Zhengyang Tang, Jianlong Chen, Juhao Liang, Ke Ji, Shuqi Guo, Yuhao Du, Fan Bu, Wenyu Du, Xiaotong Zhang, Kyle Li, Shaobo Wang, Linfeng Zhang, Yuxuan Liu, Xin Lai, Chenxin Li, Yiduo Guo, Zhexin Zhang, Xinyuan Wang, Tianyi Bai, Ziniu Li, and Benyou Wang. GameCraft-Bench: Can agents build playable games end-to-end in a real game engine? arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.17861 , 2026. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.17861 .Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye, Haowei Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Jenia Jitsev, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis Mastromichalakis, Zhiwei Xu, Zizhao Chen, Yue Liu, Robert Zhang, Leon Liangyu Chen, Anurag Kashyap, Jan-Lucas Uslu, Jeffrey Li, Jianbo Wu, Minghao Yan, Song Bian, Vedang Sharma, Ke Sun, Steven Dillmann, Akshay Anand, Andrew Lanpouthakoun, Bardia Koopah, Changran Hu, Etash Guha, Gabriel H. S. Dreiman, Jiacheng Zhu, Karl Krauth, Li Zhong, Niklas Muennighoff, Robert Amanfu, Shangyin Tan, Shreyas Pimpalgaonkar, Tushar Aggarwal, Xiangning Lin, Xin Lan, Xuandong Zhao, Yiqing Liang, Yuanli Wang, Zilong Wang, Changzhi Zhou, David Heineman, Hange Liu, Harsh Trivedi, John Yang, Junhong Lin, Manish Shetty, Michael Yang, Nabil Omi, Negin Raoof, Shanda Li, Terry Yue Zhuo, Wuwei Lin, Yiwei Dai, Yuxin Wang, Wenhao Chai, Shang Zhou, Dariush Wahdany, Ziyu She, Jiaming Hu, Zhikang Dong, Yuxuan Zhu, Sasha Cui, Ahson Saiyed, Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson, Jesse Hu, Christopher Michael Rytting, Ryan Marten, Yixin Wang, Alex Dimakis, Andy Konwinski, and Ludwig Schmidt. Terminal-Bench: Benchmarking Agents on Hard, Realistic Tasks in Command Line Interfaces, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.11868 .Samuel Miserendino, Michele Wang, Tejal Patwardhan, and Johannes Heidecke. SWE-Lancer: Can frontier LLMs earn $1 million from real-world freelance software engineering? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12115 , 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12115 .Yujia Qin, Yining Ye, Junjie Fang, Haoming Wang, Shihao Liang, Shizuo Tian, Junda Zhang, Jiahao Li, Yunxin Li, Shijue Huang, Wanjun Zhong, Kuanye Li, Jiale Yang, Yu Miao, Woyu Lin, Longxiang Liu, Xu Jiang, Qianli Ma, Jingyu Li, Xiaojun Xiao, Kai Cai, Chuang Li, Yaowei Zheng, Chaolin Jin, Chen Li, Xiao Zhou, Minchao Wang, Haoli Chen, Zhaojian Li, Haihua Yang, Haifeng Liu, Feng Lin, Tao Peng, Xin Liu, and Guang Shi. UI-TARS: Pioneering automated GUI interaction with native agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12326 , 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2501.12326 .Christopher Rawles, Sarah Clinckemaillie, Yifan Chang, Jonathan Waltz, Gabrielle Lau, Marybeth Fair, Alice Li, William Bishop, Wei Li, Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, Daniel Toyama, Robert Berry, Divya Tyamagundlu, Timothy Lillicrap, and Oriana Riva. AndroidWorld: A dynamic benchmarking environment for autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14573 , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14573 .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300 .Chenglei Si, Yanzhe Zhang, Ryan Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Ruibo Liu, and Diyi Yang. Design2Code: Benchmarking multimodal code generation for automated front-end engineering. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 3956–3974. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-long.199. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.199/ .

> 12 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

SLIME Contributors. SLIME: An LLM post-training framework. Software, commit 4c193f1f37509cca70f0e88807a9305b70f63f4e, 2026. URL https://github.com/THUDM/slime/tree/ 4c193f1f37509cca70f0e88807a9305b70f63f4e .Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform for AI software developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741 , 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741 .Xinyuan Wang, Bowen Wang, Dunjie Lu, Junlin Yang, Tianbao Xie, Junli Wang, Jiaqi Deng, Xiaole Guo, Yiheng Xu, Chen Henry Wu, Zhennan Shen, Zhuokai Li, Ryan Li, Xiaochuan Li, Junda Chen, Boyuan Zheng, Peihang Li, Fangyu Lei, Ruisheng Cao, Yeqiao Fu, Dongchan Shin, Martin Shin, Jiarui Hu, Yuyan Wang, Jixuan Chen, Yuxiao Ye, Danyang Zhang, Dikang Du, Hao Hu, Huarong Chen, Zaida Zhou, Haotian Yao, Ziwei Chen, Qizheng Gu, Yipu Wang, Heng Wang, Diyi Yang, Victor Zhong, Flood Sung, Y.Charles, Zhilin Yang, and Tao Yu. OpenCUA: Open foundations for computer-use agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09123 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.09123v3 .Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. OSWorld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07972 , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.07972 .John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793 , 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793 .John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alex L. Zhang, Kilian Lieret, Joyce Yang, Xindi Wu, Ori Press, Niklas Muennighoff, Gabriel Synnaeve, Karthik R. Narasimhan, Diyi Yang, Sida I. Wang, and Ofir Press. SWE-bench Multimodal: Do AI systems generalize to visual software domains? arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03859 , 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2410.03859 .Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 , 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.13854 .Terry Yue Zhuo, Minh Chien Vu, Jenny Chim, Han Hu, Wenhao Yu, Ratnadira Widyasari, Imam Nur Bani Yusuf, Haolan Zhan, Junda He, Indraneil Paul, Simon Brunner, Chen Gong, Thong Hoang, Armel Randy Zebaze, Xiaoheng Hong, Wen-Ding Li, Jean Kaddour, Ming Xu, Zhihan Zhang, Prateek Yadav, Naman Jain, Alex Gu, Zhoujun Cheng, Jiawei Liu, Qian Liu, Zijian Wang, Binyuan Hui, Niklas Muennighoff, David Lo, Daniel Fried, Xiaoning Du, Harm de Vries, and Leandro Von Werra. BigCodeBench: Benchmarking Code Generation with Diverse Function Calls and Complex Instructions, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15877 .

> 13 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

A Evaluation protocol and measurement  

> A.1 Patch correctness and trajectory validation

Patch correctness. The verifier applies the submitted changes to a clean task workspace and checks the requested functionality, designated existing behavior, and restrictions on permitted changes. These are the three components of 

Pi = Vu(cTi ) in Section 2. The same patch checks apply to code-only and hybrid CUA executions. 

Trajectory validation. The indicator Ui checks that the execution uses the interfaces allowed by its assigned condition and satisfies the domain’s observation-evidence requirements. Protected evaluation materials remain outside the agent’s access. Web and Mobile require screenshot observations for CUA success. DevOps verifies screenshot use through its execution records. Game validates the assigned CUA capability and records screenshot use as a trajectory measure. Task success is 

Si = PiUi.

Screenshot observations. Screenshot records link the rendered application to the agent’s visual observations. The Web API interface associates each screenshot returned by the application launcher with its image-view call. Interfaces with direct image attachments record those observations in the model request; the Mobile audit links captures to the corresponding request and response.  

> A.2 Agent capabilities and access rules

Both conditions receive the public task instruction and editable project source. Agents can read code and configuration, modify permitted files, run nonvisual builds and available project tests, and execute custom scripts against project modules. Command output, errors, and test results are returned to the agent. For example, the evaluated 2048 code-only trajectory in Appendix C loads game modules in Node, simulates key events and timers, and checks restart behavior. Protected evaluation tests and reference patches remain outside the agent’s workspace. Code-only provides this source-level execution interface. It excludes application screenshots, graphical actions, and access to the served application through a development server, direct HTTP or sockets, or browser automation. Hybrid CUA adds the designated screenshot-and-action interface: the evaluator starts the application, and the agent observes pixels and issues supported mouse, keyboard, and navigation actions. Direct DOM reads, accessibility trees, script evaluation in the browser, and direct HTTP extraction are outside this observation interface. The same task instruction and protected tests apply to both conditions. In Mobile, both receive the ordinary client source and build inputs; the prepared app also contains imported product materials such as drawings and issuer records. These materials can be inspected through the hybrid condition’s application interface. Code-only retains its nonvisual execution and command feedback on the supplied client code.  

> A.3 What visual runtime evidence contributes

Information and feedback. Visual runtime evidence consists of the rendered application and its visible responses to graphical actions. Screenshots capture layout, spatial relationships, displayed text and values, and changes across interaction states. These observations supply task-specific information and support diagnosis and verification. Information absent from the editable source can include an imported drawing, a service’s displayed response, or a target shown in the application. The Mobile gear task, for example, requires reconstructing connections from received assembly drawings before implementing the corresponding motion. Its state report describes the current client model; the received drawing specifies the intended component relations. The permitted code-only tests and scripts exercise the supplied client code, but do not expose the imported drawing. Agreement with that drawing requires reconstructing its relations and implementing their consequences for motion, phase, editing, and persistence. During development, an agent can also inspect a failure, edit the code, and exercise the modified behavior, as in checking a resize gesture or a restart. These activities connect visual requirement recovery to implementation and verification within the same task. 

Task information requirements. We annotate each task by the location of its specification. Source-specified (S) tasks define the target behavior in the public instruction and readable program text; executing and observing the application supports diagnosis and checking. Application-material dependent (M) tasks specify part of the target behavior through application materials, such as an imported drawing, a displayed service contract, or a graphical reference card. Tasks requiring both material interpretation and runtime diagnosis receive M. The labels describe specification provenance; they 

> 14 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

do not partition tasks into information acquisition versus debugging. Both groups require implementing the requested behavior and verifying the resulting software. M includes runtime-supplied materials and bundled graphical references, as detailed below. 

Annotation basis. We inspect task instructions, readable source, reference materials, and the boundary between the coding workspace and the prepared application. Model outcomes are not a classification criterion. A runtime fixture alone does not imply M: 2048 specifies restart invariants in its instruction, Fabric exposes its Help in readable HTML, and Flappy Bird includes target impulses and arcs in its source. These tasks receive S. The received gear drawings and live service contracts receive M because they supply the required interpretation. Five Boxel tasks also receive M: their restart rule appears on a graphical card bundled with the project, which the code-only interface does not display. Thus M covers 58 tasks with runtime-supplied materials and five with bundled graphical references. Appendix D gives every task’s label and specification basis.  

> A.4 Condition comparisons

Code-only and CUA comparisons pair the same tasks within each model and domain. The four-domain mean weights each domain’s task success rate equally. CUA success is computed over the full task inventory for the nine entries evaluated in all four domains. Figure 1 uses matched tasks for eight frontier models, forming 32 model–domain cohorts and 840 paired model–task observations. Differences are computed from the unrounded means. For the information-requirement analysis, we partition these same tasks by the labels in Appendix A.3. Within each domain, category, and model, code-only and hybrid rates use identical task membership and the original selected attempts. We report the number of tasks, both success rates, and their percentage-point difference. Summary rates average the same eight frontier models with both conditions evaluated in all four domains; full per-model results also include Claude-Opus-5 where evaluated. A category absent from a domain is not applicable. Appendix I reports the results. Related tasks share applications and interaction patterns: Mobile’s 20 tasks cover 12 families, including nine Gantt variants, and Game’s 29 tasks cover 12 games. Task-weighted scores measure coverage of the specified requirements; application-family analyses characterize breadth.  

> A.5 Single- and repeated-attempt evaluation

Evaluation design. Table 8 reports one attempt per task. For GPT-6-Astra, GPT-5.6-Sol, and Claude-Fable-5, we combine these first-attempt outcomes with two further executions per task, each starting from a fresh workspace. Pass@1 uses the first attempt, and pass@3 counts tasks solved in any of the three attempts. Pass@1 matches Table 8. Appendix F reports cumulative coverage, success frequencies, and uncertainty estimates. 

Game evaluation. The three rounds cover the same 29 task definitions and protected verifiers. Game success follows the native verifier under the assigned-access policy; browser use and screenshot grounding are recorded as trajectory measures. For each model and task, pass@1 uses the first execution, as in Table 8. Cumulative pass@ k counts success in at least one of the first k executions. All repeated-attempt statistics are computed from these task-level triples.  

> A.6 Execution and workload accounting

Execution settings. Model, provider, interface, and execution settings define each evaluated system. Mobile uses a budget of 60 model responses and 2,700 agent seconds, a maximum of 16,384 output tokens per request, high reasoning, and a 600-second request timeout. Its client makes one HTTP attempt per request. The Web Anthropic client permits up to ten HTTP attempts with a 300-second timeout per attempt and exponential backoff capped at 30 seconds. HTTP retries occur within a task trial. 

Resource measures. Agent wall time measures the development episode; setup and final verification have separate timers where available. DevOps uses the episode timer in its budget attestation. For frontier models, steps count assistant responses, Codex steps count completed items, and Claude Code steps use the larger of assistant records and terminal turns. Native system step counts are reported in their respective units. Screenshot captures and GUI actions measure interaction with the application. Token accounting includes input, cached-input, and output tokens; Web has final token records for 718 of its 720 single-attempt executions. Response length is output tokens divided by completed responses in an episode. 

> 15 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Aggregation. Workload summaries use recorded episode resource measurements. Four-domain summaries average episode measurements within each domain and weight the domains equally. Agent minutes per success is the ratio of this mean episode time to the full-inventory success probability. Domain-level profiles report medians, with workload intervals spanning the 25th–75th percentiles. Shared-success analyses pair tasks completed successfully by both models with resource measurements available for both executions, then summarize their per-task effort ratios.  

> A.7 Task sources and adaptations

Provenance and reproducibility. Task sources include open-source applications, documented software behaviors, and purpose-built applications with controlled faults. The date-input task adapts a reported clear-on-blur defect in React Datepicker; the DevOps gauge task implements update semantics from StatsD; and Mobile tasks use synthesized applications that import visual materials. Adaptations preserve the relevant behavior while simplifying setup for reproducible execution. Construction records identify the source revision and changes made, together with the initial conditions, triggering interactions, and observable outcomes. Seeds, input materials, and service configurations reproduce the conditions needed to investigate the task. 

Domain coverage and task families. Web tasks cover interface geometry, selection, and application contracts. Game tasks cover temporal behavior, physics, and state transitions across 12 games. DevOps tasks connect observations from service interfaces to configuration and data-processing semantics. Mobile tasks cover visually specified relationships and editing behavior across 12 mobile-web application families. Tasks retain their source application, failure mechanism, and shared implementation in their lineage; the nine Mobile wall-chart scheduling tasks, for example, belong to one family. New applications broaden behavioral coverage, while controlled variants extend difficulty within a family. Appendix H reports family-level performance. 

> 16 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

A.8 Seeded task construction and difficulty expansion 

Construction begins with a seed example and produces a family of executable visual software engineering tasks. Figure 8 shows the process: an LLM author creates the task, human review checks its requirements and visual evidence, and executable validation establishes a correct repair. Reviewed agent trials then guide the generation of neighboring tasks that extend the family’s difficulty range. A Seeded task construction New variant → repeat all gates 

1 Seed example 

> Application
> Code
> Visual behavior
> + a development need

2 LLM author 

> Task
> Project + instruction
> Gold / negative repairs Protected tests

3 Human review 

> Realistic Visible Clear
> Approve task Revise

4 Validation 

> Broken project
> Gold repair
> Negative repair
> Veri fi ed task
> + visual replay
> Validated task

B Trials, review, and expansion 

Hybrid trial → evidence review  

> Edit Rendered application Visible reference
> Screenshots + actions + patch
> Review the failed step; separate task defects

Di ffi culty ladder  

> Schematic: layout coverage
> One layout Two layouts More layouts
> Success → harder neighbor
> Reviewed failure → simpler neighbor
> Task defect → revise
> Versioned task families Evaluation + post-training

Figure 8: From a seed example to a verified difficulty ladder. An LLM author turns a seed into a runnable task. Human review and executable checks establish task validity. Reviewed agent trials drive a separate expansion loop, with every new variant returning through both gates. The chart panels show the rendered application and its visible reference from a recorded observation. The ladder illustrates increasing layout coverage; trials assess the difficulty of proposed variants. Validated task versions support benchmark evaluation and post-training. 

Seed examples and task authoring. A seed specifies an application, a concrete development need, and an interaction that exposes the relevant visual behavior. Seeds come from the application sources described in Appendix A.7. The LLM author uses this context to construct a runnable project, a task instruction, a gold reference patch, plausible incomplete repairs, and protected behavioral tests. In the Captain Callisto inventory example (Figure 3), the seed links collecting an item to an incorrect counter update. Authoring turns that example into a requirement to correct inventory updates while preserving cargo removal and level completion, with reproducible scenarios that check these behaviors. 

Human review and executable validation. Human reviewers inspect the candidate requirement, the visual evidence available through interaction, and the expected outcome. They check that the development need is meaningful, the instruction is unambiguous, and the screenshots expose the behavior needed to investigate it. Review feedback returns to the LLM author to revise the candidate. Executable checks then require the broken project and incomplete repairs to fail, and the gold patch to pass the protected tests. Interaction replay checks the corresponding visible behavior. The gold patch establishes an executable solution; negative repairs test whether the verifier rejects partial fixes. A candidate with inconsistent behavior, an inaccessible trigger, or an inadequate verifier returns for correction and revalidation. 

Agent trials and reviewed failures. Hybrid agents attempt validated tasks by observing the application, diagnosing its behavior, editing code, and checking the result. A successful trajectory supplies a concrete solution under the tested 

> 17 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

interface and budget. For a failed attempt, review connects the outcome to the screenshots, actions, and code changes, identifying the step at which the agent lost the relevant evidence or implemented an incorrect repair. Task ambiguity, runtime faults, and verifier defects trigger corrections to the task. Failures attributed to observation, reasoning, or implementation instead provide a target for expanding the task family. 

Difficulty ladders and iterative expansion. The LLM author generates neighboring variants by changing one declared demand while retaining the underlying application and behavioral requirement. A reviewed failure motivates a simpler neighbor that isolates the difficult step; a successful repair motivates a harder neighbor that extends it. For example, a selection task can vary the degree of nesting, while a temporal task can vary the history needed to interpret a displayed state. Every variant passes through the same human review and executable checks before another trial. Adjacent successes and reviewed failures locate a capability boundary for the tested agent and budget; trial outcomes determine whether the proposed ordering forms a useful ladder. Repeating this loop extends the benchmark toward more demanding visual SWE problems as agents improve. Task versions retain their seed and family lineage, preserving the distinction between new applications and difficulty variants when reporting benchmark coverage and performance. 

B Execution protocol and verifier examples  

> B.1 Execution and evaluation isolation

Each episode starts from a working copy of the task’s source and a running application. Browser actions are validated for required arguments and permitted values before execution. Visual observations contain screenshots without DOM text or accessibility metadata. The protected evaluation procedure keeps tests separate from editable files and checks the integrity of evaluation files. Patch-only verification reconstructs the application and any task-specific services, applies the candidate repair, and executes the hidden tests without invoking an agent. This separates the behavior of the submitted software from the agent’s own claims or development checks. Task setup specifies dependency installation, application startup and reset, and the viewport or device. Task-specific inputs, such as game seeds, are fixed where applicable. Each attempt receives a fresh project copy. The run protocol limits agent decisions and elapsed time, with an additional generated-token cap where configured. Interaction ends when the agent selects finish or reaches an applicable limit; the candidate change consists of the source and configuration edits accumulated by then.  

> B.2 Action interface

Each action specifies an operation and its admissible arguments. Shell actions take a command string and a timeout in seconds, capped by the remaining episode time. The computer interface is listed below; operations without arguments use an empty argument tuple.                

> Action category Operations and arguments Startup and observation start, observe Mouse input click (p), scroll (p,∆p), drag (p,p′,n)
> Drag continuation drag_start (p), drag_move (p,n), drag_end (p,n)
> Keyboard input type (ξ), press (k), key_hold (k,d)
> Browser navigation back, forward Viewport and timing resize (w,h), wait (d)

Here p, p′ are viewport pixel coordinates, ∆p is a scroll displacement, ξ is text, k is a key or key combination, n is an interpolation-step count, and (w, h) gives viewport dimensions. Computer-action durations d use milliseconds. Optional arguments use the tool’s defaults. The separate finish action submits the current workspace for verification.  

> B.3 Verifier examples

The support-appointment and 2048 restart tasks illustrate how tests distinguish complete repairs from changes that fix only part of a requirement. For both tasks, the original buggy version and an intentionally incomplete repair fail the tests, while the reference repair passes. 

> 18 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

For the support-window task, the buggy version failed both service-response tests. The incomplete repair displayed the first appointment correctly but reused that value for the second appointment. The reference repair passed both tests while preserving the schedule details. For 2048, the reference repair passed tests with seeds 42, 1337, and 3735928559. The buggy version and incomplete repair both allowed held input to change the new board after a restart. The tests compare board contents, score, occupied cells, maximum tile, and seed. They record a fresh board and a sequence of moves, hold a direction key through each restart method, and check that the new board and subsequent moves match the originals. A separate check confirms that holding a key still changes the board during normal play. 

> (a) Support schedule
> (b) 2048

Figure 9: The support-schedule and 2048 applications with reference repairs applied, illustrating the reference solutions. 

C Development examples 

The first example is a code-only trajectory from the Game evaluation. The remaining development episodes and reference replays were collected separately and illustrate how visual observations guide diagnosis, code changes, and behavioral checks. The Web examples combine a view of the bug, a reference patch, and an application replay; the Game examples trace interactions and verifier feedback. 

2048: checking restart behavior through code execution. In its successful code-only attempt, Claude-Fable-5 loads the keyboard, grid, tile, game-manager, and game-API modules into a Node test harness. It substitutes event handlers and timers, simulates held keys and restart inputs, and reads assertion output for seeded board restoration, queued movement after restart, and ordinary held-key movement. This execution checks program behavior without launching or observing the browser application. The submitted repair passes the task verifier. 

Allocation Ring Studio: sizing a chart within its container. The chart is clipped in the Stacked layout. The reference repair measures the plot area instead of the enclosing card and removes an extra gutter deduction. A replay with the same board and layout shows the ring fitting its card. The verifier checks plot-relative radius and containment across four layout profiles and three boards. 

Threadloop: revealing updates without losing reading position. The reference repair chooses between revealing a new paragraph and preserving the reader’s position based on who added the text and where that collaborator is reading. The replay shows the paragraph becoming visible. Tests check the update, the reveal-or-preserve behavior, and use of the Quill runtime. 

Captain Callisto: persistent corner contact. After a 900-ms W+Shift hold and a later 700-ms D+W hold, the screen clock advances from 7.4 to 14.0 seconds while the astronaut remains at the corner. The agent’s patch resets the collision-contact mask each frame and removes a condition that zeros horizontal velocity. The agent later reports movement after reloading, but does not complete the route and the full task fails. 

> 19 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Flappy Bird: flap strength and contact during motion. A short flap produces an impulse of 120 against a target of 220, while a held flap reaches its target of 250. A contact drill also shows an overlap without a registered collision. The agent changes the impulse calculation, update ordering, and contact handling. After reloading, the short-flap drill still shows 120 against the target of 220. The overall attempt fails. 

Core Ball: a completed replay can miss remaining defects. The agent traces a queued pin’s incorrect attachment to an angle predicted before launch. It changes the impact-angle calculation and promotes queued shots after the previous attachment updates the core’s motion. Its custom replay completes four attachments and a restart, and the build passes. The independent tests still reject the patch: the impact is resolved at the next simulation step rather than its exact arrival time, and a rejected collision still adds a pin to the occupied positions. The verifier checks both exact event timing and state preservation after rejected collisions. 

Letter Arc: replay reveals an incomplete animation repair. A completed round initially shows the correct letters and colors. The agent identifies a conflict between the finish animation and the tile’s reveal transform, then edits the CSS. Replaying the finish exposes a new problem: the revealed colors disappear in the paused frame. Further edits separate the animation layers and add styles preserving the revealed status during celebration. The recorded interactions do not show a successful replay of the final patch. Independently, the evaluator records a passing build and 24 passing browser checkpoints, covering visual continuity, repeated replay, Continue behavior, restart, daily/practice modes, and reduced-motion completion. 

Recipient selection: code checks and a stale interface. Interface guidance indicates that Enter should append the highlighted recipient. The agent updates the selection policy and builds the application. Direct transition checks confirm that Enter appends Iceland to Norway and Sweden, while a keep operation preserves the existing selection. Browser interactions still show cleared recipients, which the agent attributes to a stale application bundle. Thus, the source-level checks pass while the recorded browser replay still shows the failure. 

Vector Relay: transferring a scheduled event. The agent launches an orb and observes a lost return: the relay stays armed, the score remains zero, and the failed-return indicator turns red. It traces the failure to a scheduled event whose owner changes when the orb is replaced. The patch cancels the event on manual recall but transfers it on replacement or receiver movement. Source-level checks confirm cancellation, settlement after two transfers, and rejection of repeated contact. A subsequent browser replay shows “Circuit complete” and a score of 500; the independent evaluator also records a pass. Hextris: the first edit does not end the investigation    

> 1Play and observe
> Initial score: 9
> 2Edit, reload, recheck
> Still 9 after the first edit
> 3Continue the repair
> A later cascade reaches 27
> The saved final patch also passes separate deterministic tests.

Figure 10: A replay can show that more work is needed. Three frames from one Hextris run show the initial score of nine, an unsuccessful recheck after the first edit, and a later cascade reaching 27. The intervening work includes further inspection, temporary diagnostics, and reloads. Screenshots are cropped around the board; the task’s implementation hint is above the crop. The final source change is checked separately by the evaluator. 

Hextris: continuing after a failed check. The task provides a visible implementation hint. After observing a score of nine, the agent queues blocks that settle again and delays each check until blocks of that color stop moving. The first replay still shows nine. Further inspection, temporary diagnostics, and reloads produce a cascade reaching 27. The agent then removes the diagnostics and revises the queue handling. A local test confirms that the score remains nine while a same-color block moves and reaches 27 after settlement. The final patch preserves the three-block match threshold. The independent 

> 20 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

evaluator records a pass, including two negative controls; its separate test fixture ends at 41. Figure 10 illustrates several rounds of revision and checking. 

D Complete task list 

Table 2 lists the 36 Web, 29 Game, 20 DevOps, and 20 Mobile tasks, with information-requirement labels and their specification basis. M denotes application-material dependent and S denotes source-specified, as defined in Appendix A.3. 

Table 2: Task information requirements. M denotes application-material dependent; S denotes source-specified (Appendix A.3). Each row gives the specification basis. Names recur across distinct scenarios; tasks follow the released manifest order within each domain. Domain Task Type Specification basis Web MapLibre reset touch reacquisition S The instruction specifies pointer attachment and preservation of navigation. Web Fabric opposite-edge resize S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Web ECharts linked data-zoom toolbar S The instruction specifies corresponding chart ranges; source exposes range-mapping strategies. Web Fabric viewport rotation controls S The instruction specifies frame, handle, and zoom agreement under camera transforms. Web JupyterLab Shift-click cell selection S The instruction distinguishes cell-range selection from extension of text selection. Web Fabric through-edge resize with nested camera S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Web Quill paste and scroll round trip M The collaboration bar supplies the presence-dependent meaning of the update. Web DatePicker mask, clear and blur S The instruction specifies cleared versus invalid-date behavior. Web Fabric through-edge resize with nested camera S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Web Recharts responsive pie layout M The approved reference image specifies how the ring fits the board. Web Slate soft break and scroll S The instruction specifies caret visibility while retaining the preceding lines. Web MapLibre mouse ridge attachment S The instruction specifies pointer attachment and preservation of navigation. Web Tiptap keyboard focus position M The workspace note and rendered draft distinguish the current bookmark from stale anchors. Web MapLibre reset terrain reacquisition S The instruction specifies pointer attachment and preservation of navigation. Web Fabric Single-to-Nested return S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Web Account recovery contract M The live identity policy specifies the applicable recovery channel. Web MapLibre reset integration handoff S The instruction specifies pointer attachment and preservation of navigation. Web Delegated action contract M The live authorization policy specifies the delegated action. Web Handsontable menu scroll anchor S The instruction specifies menu anchoring and closure on anchor disappearance. Web MapLibre terrain pinch anchor S The instruction specifies the geographic point to preserve during pinch and pan. Web ComboBox selection M The workspace keyboard guide specifies Enter, Escape, and Tab behavior. Web ComboBox selection M The workspace keyboard guide specifies Enter, Escape, and Tab behavior. Web Responsive masonry overlap S The instruction specifies persistent section visibility and non-overlap on resize. Web Saleor export of current search M The workspace export guide specifies request fields and filter encoding. Web MapLibre post-wheel reacquisition S The instruction specifies pointer attachment and preservation of navigation. Web MapLibre reset wheel reacquisition S The instruction specifies pointer attachment and preservation of navigation. Web Subscription renewal contract M The live lifecycle contract specifies the renewal interpretation. Web Support window contract M The service contract specifies the selected support window. Web Tax rounding contract M The live calculation contract specifies the tax convention. Web Fabric through-edge resize S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Web Vue sticky table columns M The table preferences supply the active density geometry token and value. Web Warehouse cutoff M The live dispatch contract specifies cutoff and shipping-day rules. Web Warehouse cutoff M The live dispatch contract specifies cutoff and shipping-day rules. Web Nested Fabric selection S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Web Nested Fabric selection S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Web Nested Fabric selection S Readable Help in index.html specifies the resize and selection contract. Game Captain Callisto: jetpack timing S The instruction and jetpack implementation define burst growth, release, and restart consistency. Game Captain Callisto: jetpack timing S The instruction and jetpack implementation define burst growth, release, and restart consistency. Game Captain Callisto: level-completion transition S The instruction requires completion to persist after the approach and release sequence. Game Captain Callisto: cargo collection M The live cargo scanner supplies the route-to-credit interpretation. 

21 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Domain Task Type Specification basis Game Captain Callisto: platform contact S The instruction specifies non-clipping contact and continued passage at the deck corner. Game Captain Callisto: lift-transition physics S The instruction specifies directional continuity across the moving-support handoff. Game Captain Callisto: level-completion transition S The instruction requires completion to persist after the approach and release sequence. Game 2048: seeded restart consistency S The instruction specifies deterministic restart without a queued post-restart move. Game 2048: seeded restart consistency S The instruction specifies deterministic restart without a queued post-restart move. Game Astray: glass collisions and parallax S The instruction specifies the full color sequence and continued movement. Game Core Ball: pin attachment and collision S The instruction specifies agreement between pin approach and attachment. Game Hextris: stable cascade settlement S The instruction specifies cascade completion under the existing match-size rule. Game Hextris: cascade settlement S The instruction specifies cascade completion under the existing match-size rule. Game Pac-Man: warning-state handoff S The instruction specifies agreement among warning, contact, and resumed route. Game Minesweeper: delayed-loss reset M The Episode integrity panel supplies the required delayed-loss timing. Game Signal Weave: checkpoint and hazard synchronization M The route card supplies the lane handoff orientation. Game Vector Relay: deferred-event ownership S The instruction specifies one delayed settlement after natural replacement. Game Vector Relay: pulse-balance handoff S The instruction distinguishes manual recall from natural replacement. Game Letter Arc: finish animation and replay S The instruction specifies an intact completed row throughout finish and replay. Game Boxel Rebound: restart and camera continuity M The application image card specifies restart phase and camera reconstruction. Game Boxel Rebound: restart and camera continuity M The application image card specifies restart phase and camera reconstruction. Game Boxel Rebound: restart and camera continuity M The application image card specifies restart phase and camera reconstruction. Game Boxel Rebound: restart and camera continuity M The application image card specifies restart phase and camera reconstruction. Game Boxel Rebound: restart and camera continuity M The application image card specifies restart phase and camera reconstruction. Game Flappy Bird: flight timing and contact S The source contains the target impulses and arcs used by the Flight Lab. Game Flappy Bird: flight timing and contact S The source contains the target impulses and arcs used by the Flight Lab. Game Flappy Bird: flight timing and contact S The source contains the target impulses and arcs used by the Flight Lab. Game Flappy Bird: flight timing and contact S The source contains the target impulses and arcs used by the Flight Lab. Game Minesweeper: delayed-loss reset M The Episode integrity panel supplies the revised delayed-loss timing. DevOps Async trace context propagation M The compatibility catalog supplies the manager-specific continuation contract. DevOps Cross-host trace clock correction M Operator notes and calibration guidance specify clock authority and correction scope. DevOps Alert inhibition identity M The deployed scope registry and operator guidance specify suppression eligibility. DevOps Rate-before-aggregation semantics M The deployed query definitions and publication lineage identify the correct input binding. DevOps SLO availability rollups M The reporting agreement specifies the required regional weighting and rollup. DevOps Log severity normalization M Receiver records and fleet conventions specify the severity interpretation. DevOps Tail-sampling decision windows M The receiver policy or runbook supplies the contractual decision-time band. DevOps Alert pending identity and routing M The receiver selector and routing policy specify the stable alert identity. DevOps StatsD gauge update modes M The endpoint provisioning or relay announce contract specifies update semantics. DevOps Rate-before-aggregation semantics M The deployed query definitions and publication lineage identify the correct input binding. DevOps Tail-sampling decision windows M The receiver policy or runbook supplies the contractual decision-time band. DevOps StatsD gauge update modes M The endpoint provisioning or relay announce contract specifies update semantics. DevOps Rate-before-aggregation semantics M The deployed query definitions and publication lineage identify the correct input binding. DevOps Async trace context propagation M The compatibility catalog supplies the manager-specific continuation contract. DevOps SLO availability rollups M The reporting agreement specifies the required regional weighting and rollup. 

22 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Domain Task Type Specification basis DevOps Alert inhibition identity M The deployed scope registry and operator guidance specify suppression eligibility. DevOps Log severity normalization M Receiver records and fleet conventions specify the severity interpretation. DevOps Cross-host trace clock correction M Operator notes and calibration guidance specify clock authority and correction scope. DevOps Alert pending identity and routing M The receiver selector and routing policy specify the stable alert identity. DevOps Scrape response phase deadlines M The policy activation board and authority matrix supply the freshness and abort bounds. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Brine & Beam: received wall-chart schedules M Received drawings specify job durations, dependencies, and report requirements. Mobile Repair imported inspection measurements M Imported calibration and reports specify annotation and measurement interpretation. Mobile Marble Post: imported runs no longer agree with office packets M Received track packets specify the simulation and edited-plan receipt contract. Mobile Repair Tideglass’s received-plan preview M Received assembly drawings specify gear connections and motion relationships. Mobile Repair Mural Desk’s imported projection workflow M Imported projection-office packets specify mapping and inverse-edit semantics. Mobile Northline tour review: hotspots drift from imported panoramas M Imported tour reports specify panorama registration and hotspot interpretation. Mobile Repair the received-plate integration M Received finder/plate pairs specify field registrations and target offsets. Mobile Repair Foldnote proof review M Imported artwork and panel reports specify placement and orientation. Mobile Repair Lantern’s delivered show integration M Delivered patchboard and timing sheets specify signal and memory behavior. Mobile Repair the Lamp courier pickup review M Delivered pose and exposure boards specify the approved performance. Mobile Repair the pass wallet M Issuer records and receipts specify availability and validation semantics. Mobile Repair Campus Pocket’s imported-campus routing M Imported maps and routing reports specify permitted trips and route interpretation. 

E Post-training implementation and RLVR extension 

E.1 SFT data construction across domains 

Verified reference replays. We use the same SFT data construction pipeline in each domain, instantiated with that domain’s application environments, reference repairs, and native verifiers. For each task, a fixed reference policy executes the gold repair in a fresh environment: it starts the browser and receives a screenshot, applies the gold patch through a shell action, runs the reference validation command, waits 750 ms through the computer tool to obtain an updated screenshot, and finishes the episode. The task’s native verifier then checks the resulting repair. A complete replay supplies training data only after passing verification. These scripted replays provide supervision for repair execution and its surrounding tool interactions, using screenshots returned by the running application. 

Action prefixes and sampling weights. Each accepted replay yields five cumulative conversation prefixes, one for each action. A prefix contains the task instruction and the messages and observations available before its target action, followed by that action as the supervised response. This preserves the information available at each decision point. We oversample these prefixes with the fixed weights in Table 3, emphasizing the patch-application action. Thus, N accepted replays produce 5 N distinct task/action prefix positions and 44 N weighted training rows. Repeated rows change the sampling 

23 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

weight of a prefix; the underlying task and demonstration remain the same. Table 3: SFT prefix construction for each domain. Each row supervises the indicated action, conditioned on the preceding conversation. Screenshot counts refer to images available before that action.               

> Supervised action Copies per task Screenshots in context Start browser 20Apply gold patch 32 1Validate repair 41Wait and observe 21Finish episode 42Total 44 —

Multimodal representation and target masking. Each example stores the conversation, references to its screenshot inputs, and metadata linking it to the task version, reference replay, and prefix position. The loader applies the supervised loss only to the final assistant action. Earlier assistant actions, task instructions, tool outputs, and screenshots provide conditioning context and receive no prediction loss. The browser-start prefix is text-only because its target action precedes the first screenshot; the finish prefix conditions on both observations. Before training, token-level checks verify the target mask, context length, and action-token limit for every weighted example. 

E.2 Supervised fine-tuning 

Training configuration. The SFT experiment in Section 4.4 uses Qwen3.8-27B, the weighted action-prefix examples described in Appendix E.1, and 1,801 optimizer updates. Training starts from the base checkpoint with shuffled examples, per-token supervised loss, and global and rollout batch sizes of four. The vision encoder and linear-attention parameters are frozen. The learning rate decreases from 10 −6 to 2 × 10 −7 with zero warm-up, and the token budget is 16,384 per GPU. The update budget corresponds to 7,204 nominal sample slots, approximately 4.96 passes over the weighted dataset. Figure 7 includes every recorded batch loss. Its smooth curve is the trailing arithmetic mean over at most 50 updates, rather than an epoch-level average. 

Evaluation. Both checkpoints are evaluated on the same set of tasks, with one greedy attempt per task and matched interaction settings. The outcome is the native task-verifier result Pi: 11.1% for the base model and 33.3% for the SFT checkpoint. The task-success metric used in the benchmark comparison also includes trajectory compliance, Si = PiUi;these SFT results report Pi.

E.3 Verifiable rewards and the trajectory-level GRPO objective 

Verifiable rewards. For trajectory i ending with codebase cTi , the terminal repair reward is Ri = Pi = Vu(cTi ). It is determined by the verifier, which checks the requested behavior, designated existing functionality, and restrictions on permitted changes. Scoring starts from a clean baseline, transfers permitted edits, rebuilds the application, and runs the task’s tests. Changes to protected evaluator or build files are rejected; candidate dependencies and generated build outputs are not used for scoring. A compilation failure or failed requirement earns zero. A successful repair supplies supervision for the entire sequence of coding and computer use that produced it. Test progress is recorded for analysis; its optional use in reward shaping is disabled in the default configuration described below. 

Group-relative learning. The RLVR extension adapts GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) to complete development episodes. For each task, the behavior policy samples G trajectories from fresh workspaces. For a group with valid scoring outcomes, define ¯R = 1

G

> G

# ∑

> i=1

Ri, sR =

s

1

G − 1

> G

# ∑

> i=1

(Ri − ¯R)2, Ai = Ri − ¯RsR + δ . (1) Here δ > 0 is a numerical stability constant. Every generated token in trajectory i receives the same advantage Ai. Groups in which all repairs succeed or all fail are retained with zero advantage. An interleaved trajectory contains both model outputs and environment observations. Let mi,k = 1 at generated-token positions and zero elsewhere, Li = ∑k mi,k, and Hi,k denote the multimodal prefix preceding token zi,k. With ρi,k(θ ) = 

> 24 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

πθ (zi,k | Hi,k)/πold (zi,k | Hi,k), the policy objective is 

J(θ ) = Eu, τ1: G|F=1

"

1

G

> G

# ∑

> i=1

1

Li ∑

> k

mi,kℓi,k(θ )

#

,ℓi,k(θ ) = min  ρi,kAi, clip (ρi,k, 1 − εlow , 1 + εhigh )Ai

 .

(2) The hyperparameters εlow and εhigh control the lower and upper clipping bounds on the probability ratio. Here F = 1means that all trajectories in the group have usable scoring outcomes. The old-policy probabilities are computed by the training backend. Both KL regularization and entropy bonuses are disabled. The mask excludes observations from the prediction loss while retaining them as conditioning context. Per-trajectory normalization by Li prevents longer responses from receiving more weight solely because they contain more generated tokens. This adaptation changes the unit of sampling from a standalone answer to a development episode, replaces answer correctness with executable repair verification, and restricts the loss to generated tokens across all turns. We implement the objective using SLIME (SLIME Contributors, 2026), coupling its policy updates to the coding and computer-use environment. Worker failures require separate treatment: a failed attempt is retried from a fresh workspace, and if retries are exhausted, all trajectories sampled for that task prompt are excluded and replaced before normalization. Such failures have no model reward. Evaluation reports a failure status after retry exhaustion. 

Training procedure. Each iteration samples a batch of task prompts, executes G development episodes per prompt, computes verifier rewards and relative advantages, and updates the policy. Updated weights are synchronized to the rollout engine for the next iteration. Appendix E.4 describes the rollout and update interface. This procedure defines the RLVR extension; the completed post-training experiment in Section 4.4 uses SFT.  

> E.4 Rollout and update interface

Parallel development episodes. The implementation connects a persistent browser and editable workspace to SLIME’s multimodal rollout interface. Each attempt receives fresh files and application ports, allowing independent development episodes to run in parallel. The policy’s generated tokens, their sampling log probabilities, image inputs, and observation masks are preserved in one interleaved sample. The policy conditions on the sequence of observations and actions up to its context limit. SGLang supplies inference and the Megatron backend supplies policy updates, with weights synchronized through SLIME’s training loop. Figure 11 illustrates this interface. 

Verifiable feedback. The scoring copy rejects protected-file and symlink edits and retains baseline dependencies and build configuration. Baseline fingerprints detect mutation outside the candidate workspace. Reset, browser, inference, and verifier-runtime failures are distinguished from unsuccessful repairs; unresolved infrastructure failures are excluded before computing group advantages. The default reward is binary repair correctness, with no intermediate rewards. Generated tokens share the episode-level advantage, while environment observations condition the policy without receiving prediction loss. 

Scaling RLVR. Independent rollouts and executable scoring permit additional workers to collect verifiable experience without manually labeling each attempted repair. Scaling this process to long hybrid-CUA trajectories requires balancing rollout throughput, optimization stability, and credit assignment across coding and interaction. Scalable RLVR is immediate future work; the completed experiment reported here is supervised fine-tuning. 

> 25

CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task Bug description + source snapshot G independent attempts on the same task 

1 Interactive development 

Policy π θ

One model 

> for both tools

Shell 

Read / edit source 

> Build / run commands

Computer 

Mouse / keyboard Observe / wait 

Fresh workspace  

> >_ source + runtime
> Web Game
> Separate episodes Screenshots + tool output

Δc 

2 Verify the repair 

Apply permitted edits 

to a clean baseline 

Rebuild + run tests 

> Task-defined requirements

Terminal reward 

Pass: 1 Fail: 0 

> All G attempts have scoring outcomes Worker error → retry; exhausted → exclude and replace group

3 Update the policy 

Same-task group 

τ₁ R₁ τ₂ R₂ τ₃ R₃ τ₄ R₄ 

> G = 4 by default

Multimodal history + loss mask 

Obs. 

0

Action 

1

Obs. 

0

Action 

1

Loss on generated tokens only 

GRPO 

> Group-relative advantage

Clipped policy update 

New weights → π θ′ KL coefficient = 0 

> Refresh rollout policy

Figure 11: RLVR extension using verifiable software repairs. For the same task, the policy samples several development trajectories in separate workspaces. Shell commands and computer actions return text and screenshots. At termination, permitted source changes are transferred to a clean scoring copy and checked by deterministic tests. Complete, successfully scored groups provide relative advantages for a policy update; observations condition the policy but receive no direct prediction loss. Application thumbnails show example Web and Game applications. 

26 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

F Repeated-attempt evaluation 

Table 4 measures the coverage gained from two additional attempts relative to the first-attempt results in Table 8. Each attempt starts from a fresh workspace under the domain’s fixed task, access, and verification settings. 

Additional attempts expand task coverage. GPT-6-Astra reaches pass@3 of 75.0% on Web, 62.1% on Game, 90.0% on DevOps, and 60.0% on Mobile. On Game, its cumulative pass@1, pass@2, and pass@3 are 37.9%, 58.6%, and 62.1%, respectively: 11 tasks are solved in the first attempt, 17 in at least one of the first two attempts, and 18 in at least one of all three attempts. Appendix A.5 describes the repeated evaluation’s cohort composition. 

Stable competence and additional-attempt coverage. Repeated evaluation distinguishes tasks an agent completes consistently from those reached through another development trajectory. In the three-attempt Game study, GPT-6-Astra solves 34.5% of tasks in all three attempts, compared with 3.4% for GPT-5.6-Sol. Ten of its 18 solved tasks succeed in every attempt; the remaining eight succeed in one or two attempts. On Mobile, an additional attempt lets GPT-5.6-Sol complete the sprite task and GPT-6-Astra complete one schedule variant; the remaining schedule variants continue to distinguish this family from the broadly solved application tasks. Thus additional attempts expand coverage while the task-level success patterns identify capabilities requiring more reliable execution. Appendix F reports all rates and uncertainty estimates within the repeated evaluation. 

Task coverage and sampling uncertainty. We assess task-sampling uncertainty on Web and Game with 20,000 paired bootstrap resamples, preserving each task’s outcomes across models and attempts. On Game, GPT-6-Astra’s pass@3 advantage over GPT-5.6-Sol is 31.0 points, with a 95% interval of [13.8, 48.3]. Resampling whole game families gives an interval of [11.5, 50.0], supporting the same ordering under variation in the composition of source games. Appendix F gives both model comparisons, the pass@ k profiles, and the resampling methods. Table 4: Three-attempt hybrid CUA success (%). Each cell reports pass@1 / pass@3. Pass@1 uses the first attempt; pass@3 uses all three.             

> Domain GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol Claude-Fable-5 Web 66.7 / 75.0 58.3 / 58.3 47.2 / 61.1 Game 37.9 / 62.1 10.3 / 31.0 17.2 / 41.4 DevOps 80.0 / 90.0 55.0 / 60.0 55.0 / 70.0 Mobile 55.0 / 60.0 45.0 / 50.0 40.0 / 40.0

F.1 Metrics and aggregation 

We evaluate GPT-6-Astra, GPT-5.6-Sol, and Claude-Fable-5 with three attempts per task across Web, Game, DevOps, and Mobile. For task i, let si j ∈ { 0, 1} denote success in attempt j, in the recorded execution order. For a domain with N tasks, cumulative success is pass@ k = 100 N−1 ∑i ⊮[∑kj=1 si j > 0], for k ∈ { 1, 2, 3}. A task remains covered once any of its first k

attempts succeeds. Pass@1 therefore matches the single-attempt comparison, and pass@3 counts tasks solved at least once across all three attempts. Table 5 reports this cumulative profile for Web and Game, where ordered task-level outcomes are available. Appendix A.5 describes the execution protocol and attempt composition. Four-domain means average the unrounded domain rates equally. Web and Game statistics use the recorded ordered task-level outcomes. DevOps and Mobile pass@1 and pass@3 use the recorded aggregate outcomes. We compute task-level bootstrap intervals for Web and Game. The task-level success profiles and success-frequency distributions below describe Web and Game. The frequency distributions give the percentage of tasks solved in zero, one, two, or all three attempts, distinguishing consistently solved tasks from those reached through additional attempts. 

> 27 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Table 5: Task success across attempt budgets (%). Mean of three is the average single-attempt success within this repeated cohort. Pass@2 averages all two-attempt subsets; pass@3 uses all three. The difference is pass@3 minus mean single-attempt success, in percentage points. Results cover Web and Game. 

Domain Model Mean of three Pass@2 Pass@3 Diff. (pp) Web GPT-6-Astra 67.6 72.2 75.0 +7.4 GPT-5.6-Sol 52.8 57.4 58.3 +5.6 Claude-Fable-5 52.8 59.3 61.1 +8.3 Game GPT-6-Astra 50.6 59.8 62.1 +11.5 GPT-5.6-Sol 20.7 29.9 31.0 +10.3 Claude-Fable-5 27.6 36.8 41.4 +13.8 

Table 6: Success frequency across three attempts. Entries give the percentage of tasks with zero, one, two, or three successful attempts. Each row sums to 100% before rounding. Results cover Web and Game. 

Domain Model 0 successes 1 success 2 successes 3 successes Web GPT-6-Astra 25.0 8.3 5.6 61.1 GPT-5.6-Sol 41.7 2.8 11.1 44.4 Claude-Fable-5 38.9 5.6 13.9 41.7 Game GPT-6-Astra 37.9 6.9 20.7 34.5 GPT-5.6-Sol 69.0 3.4 24.1 3.4 Claude-Fable-5 58.6 13.8 13.8 13.8 

> 28 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

F.2 Task-sampling uncertainty 

For the paired model comparisons in Table 7, we also report the mean success rate across all three attempts, S =

100 (3N)−1 ∑i ∑3 

> j=1

si j . For statistical intervals on Web and Game, we resample tasks within each domain, drawing the domain’s original number of tasks with replacement. Each sampled task carries the outcomes of all three models and all three attempts, preserving the pairing in model comparisons. We recompute the three-attempt mean S, cumulative pass@3, and the paired model differences in each of 20,000 bootstrap replicates, and use the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles as the 95% interval. These intervals quantify variation under resampling of the evaluated tasks. We also perform a family-level sensitivity analysis, using nine taxonomy-defined task families on Web and twelve source games on Game. Each replicate resamples the domain’s original number of groups and includes every task from each sampled group. Rates retain task weighting, with the total number of sampled tasks providing the replicate’s normalization. All model and attempt outcomes remain paired. This analysis preserves dependence among related tasks while measuring sensitivity to the benchmark’s composition of task families and source games. Table 7: Paired task-success differences for GPT-6-Astra (pp). Intervals are 95% percentile intervals from 20,000 paired resamples. Task resampling operates within each domain; family resampling selects whole task families and retains task weighting. All model outcomes and three attempts for each task remain together. Results cover Web and Game.                                        

> Domain Compared with Measure Difference Task 95% CI Family 95% CI Web GPT-5.6-Sol Mean of three +14.8 [3.7, 25.9] [-1.3, 33.3] GPT-5.6-Sol Pass@3 +16.7 [2.8, 30.6] [-6.7, 42.9] Claude-Fable-5 Mean of three +14.8 [3.7, 25.9] [0.0, 32.5] Claude-Fable-5 Pass@3 +13.9 [0.0, 27.8] [-4.3, 33.3] Game GPT-5.6-Sol Mean of three +29.9 [17.2, 43.7] [15.3, 47.2] GPT-5.6-Sol Pass@3 +31.0 [13.8, 48.3] [11.5, 50.0] Claude-Fable-5 Mean of three +23.0 [8.0, 39.1] [10.0, 42.0] Claude-Fable-5 Pass@3 +20.7 [0.0, 41.4] [0.0, 41.4]
> 29 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

G Domain-level CUA performance 

We summarize CUA performance across Web, Game, DevOps, and Mobile, giving each domain equal weight. GPT-6-Astra achieves a mean task success rate of 59.9%, followed by GPT-5.6-Sol at 42.2%, Grok-4.6 and Codex with GPT-5.6-Sol at 41.9%, and Claude-Fable-5 at 39.9%. Table 8 provides the complete domain-level results. 

Domain and family strengths. GPT-6-Astra achieves the highest observed CUA task success rate in each domain: 66.7% on Web, 37.9% on Game, 80.0% on DevOps, and 55.0% on Mobile (Appendix G). Its Web advantage over GPT-5.6-Sol is concentrated in Canvas interactions after geometry changes, while its Mobile results distinguish precise gear relationships and sprite pose assignments (Figure 15). Across Game, the union of successful CUA repairs covers 58.6% of tasks. 

Complementary strengths among frontier agents. Individual tasks reveal capabilities that the aggregate ranking compresses. Claude-Opus-4.8 uniquely solves a DevOps alert-routing task by preserving the labels consumed by receiver selectors. Grok-4.6 and Codex with GPT-5.6-Sol solve a log-normalization task by combining transport format with the original producer’s severity convention. GPT-6-Astra misses both tasks. These contrasts expose distinct demands on identifying which application facts determine a correct repair. 

Complete agent systems. Codex with GPT-5.6-Sol reaches 55.6% on Web, 17.2% on Game, 55.0% on DevOps, and 40.0% on Mobile. Claude Code with Claude-Opus-5 reaches 55.6%, 20.7%, and 65.0% on Web, Game, and DevOps. Relative to the corresponding frontier models, Codex’s Game rate is 6.9 percentage points higher and Claude Code’s DevOps rate is 5.0 points higher. These comparisons characterize the combination of model, tools, and execution strategy. Table 8: Single-attempt task success (%) across four domains. Code denotes code-only access; hybrid CUA adds screenshots and graphical actions. Teal marks column maxima; an em dash indicates no reported result. 

Web Game DevOps Mobile Model / system Code Hybrid CUA Code Hybrid CUA Code Hybrid CUA Code Hybrid CUA GPT-6-Astra 27.8 66.7 17.2 37.9 0.0 80.0 0.0 55.0 

GPT-5.6-Sol 19.4 58.3 10.3 10.3 0.0 55.0 0.0 45.0 GPT-5.6-Luna 11.1 5.6 0.0 6.9 0.0 15.0 0.0 35.0 GPT-5.6-Terra 11.1 13.9 3.4 6.9 0.0 25.0 0.0 35.0 Claude-Opus-5 22.2 55.6 13.8 20.7 0.0 60.0 — —Claude-Opus-4.8 16.7 27.8 3.4 20.7 0.0 55.0 0.0 40.0 Claude-Sonnet-5 8.3 0.0 6.9 3.4 0.0 40.0 0.0 35.0 Claude-Fable-5 19.4 47.2 13.8 17.2 5.0 55.0 5.0 40.0 Grok-4.6 30.6 55.6 10.3 17.2 0.0 65.0 0.0 30.0 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol — 55.6 — 17.2 — 55.0 — 40.0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 — 55.6 — 20.7 — 65.0 — —

> 30 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 020 40 60 

> Task success (%)

Web 

66.7 58.3 5.6 13.9 55.6 27.8 0.0 47.2 55.6 55.6 55.6 GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 010 20 30 40 

> Task success (%)

Game 

37.9 10.3 6.9 6.9 20.7 20.7 3.4 17.2 17.2 17.2 20.7 

Figure 12: CUA task success on Web (top) and Game (bottom). Bars report success rates for nine frontier models and two agent systems over the full task inventories: 36 tasks on Web and 29 on Game. 

31 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 025 50 75 100 

> Task success (%)

DevOps 

80.0 55.0 15.0 25.0 60.0 55.0 40.0 55.0 65.0 55.0 65.0 GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 020 40 60 

> Task success (%)

## — —

Mobile 

55.0 45.0 35.0 35.0 40.0 35.0 40.0 30.0 40.0 

Figure 13: CUA task success on DevOps (top) and Mobile (bottom). Bars report CUA task success rates for the evaluated models and agent systems. Colors follow Figure 12. 

32 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 050 100 Web  

> GPT-6-Astra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Fable-5 025 50

Game       

> GPT-6-Astra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Fable-5 12510 20 40 050 100

DevOps       

> GPT-6-Astra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Fable-5 12510 20 40 050 100

Mobile 

> GPT-6-Astra Claude-Fable-5 Task success (%) Median agent time (min; log scale) GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5

Figure 14: Task success and median development time within each domain. Points pair task success (vertical axis) with median agent time (horizontal axis, logarithmic). Resource coverage and aggregation are specified in Appendix A.6. Colored rings and direct labels highlight GPT-6-Astra, Claude-Opus-5, and Claude-Fable-5; the shared legend names the other entries. Circles denote frontier models; open and filled squares denote Codex and Claude Code, respectively, with nested squares for the nearly coincident Web estimates. Success axes span 0–50% for Game and 0–100% elsewhere. 

33 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

H Task-family performance Canvas Maps Charts Rich text Tables Forms Notebooks Layout Work fl ow contracts 

GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

55.6 11.1 0.0 11.1 11.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 33.3 11.1 11.1 14.3 14.3 0.0 0.0 14.3 14.3 0.0 14.3 14.3 14.3 14.3 100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 50.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 33.3 0.0 100.0 66.7 0.0 100.0 33.3 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 50.0 0.0 50.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 66.7 66.7 33.3 33.3 100.0 0.0 0.0 66.7 100.0 66.7 100.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 87.5 100.0 0.0 12.5 100.0 50.0 0.0 100.0 87.5 87.5 87.5 

a Web 

2048 Astray Boxel Rebound Captain Callisto Core Ball Flappy Bird Hextris Minesweeper Pac-Man Signal Weave Vector Relay Letter Arc 

GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

100.0 50.0 0.0 50.0 0.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 60.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 20.0 0.0 20.0 20.0 0.0 14.3 0.0 0.0 28.6 14.3 0.0 14.3 28.6 14.3 28.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 50.0 100.0 50.0 100.0 100.0 50.0 100.0 50.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 100.0 0.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

b Game 

Trace context Clock correction Alert inhibition Rate aggregation SLO rollups Log severity Tail sampling Alert routing Gauge updates Scrape deadlines 

GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 50.0 50.0 100.0 50.0 0.0 50.0 50.0 100.0 50.0 100.0 50.0 0.0 50.0 100.0 100.0 50.0 100.0 100.0 50.0 100.0 66.7 33.3 0.0 33.3 33.3 33.3 66.7 66.7 66.7 33.3 66.7 100.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 50.0 0.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 50.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 100.0 0.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 100.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 

c DevOps 

Gantt schedules Calibration Marble run Gear assemblies Mural warp Panorama Star registration Packaging proof Relay board Sprite sequences Wallet access Way fi nding 

GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 —0.0 0.0 0.0 

> ?

0.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 

> ?

100.0 —100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 —0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 —100.0 0.0 100.0 100.0 0.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 —0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 —100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 —0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 —

d Mobile 

0 25 50 75 100 

CUA task success (%) 

— Not evaluated 

? Unresolved linkage 

Figure 15: CUA task success across task families. Cells report task success rates within each family, with purple intensity encoding the percentage. Web families group applications and tools; Game families retain source-game identity; DevOps and Mobile follow task-contract categories. Rows below the separator show agent systems. Rates use each family’s full task inventory. Em dashes denote unevaluated models. Question marks denote Grok-4.6’s two Mobile family estimates with unresolved task outcomes: 0–11.1% for Gantt schedules and 0–100% for Marble run (Appendix A.5). 

34 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

I Task-level outcomes and paired differences 

Figure 1 compares development with source-level execution against development that additionally uses application screenshots and GUI actions. Both conditions provide feedback from nonvisual commands; hybrid CUA also exposes the assembled application’s visual state and materials and supports interactive checks of the effects of code changes. 

Connecting visual evidence to the repair. The additional successes reveal two ways application access supports software development. It exposes material that determines the required implementation, such as received drawings and displayed service behavior. It also lets agents exercise a changed application and inspect the outcome: GPT-6-Astra’s additional Game successes include delayed terminal state, checkpoint synchronization, and camera behavior after restart. In Web, its nested-selection trajectory uses a drag after resizing to discover and repair a second interaction defect. These cases connect the access comparison to concrete changes in the development process. 

Web and Game. On Web, GPT-5.6-Sol achieves 19.4% task success with code-only access and 58.3% with hybrid access; Claude-Opus-5 achieves 22.2% and 55.6%, respectively. On Game, the corresponding rates are 3.4% and 20.7% for Claude-Opus-4.8, and 17.2% and 37.9% for GPT-6-Astra. 

DevOps and Mobile. Agents inspect service interfaces and visual materials, use graphical controls to explore their behavior, and translate these observations into code changes. On DevOps, the nine frontier models average 50.0% with hybrid access and 0.6% with code alone. On Mobile, GPT-5.6-Sol achieves 0.0% with code-only access and 45.0% with hybrid access; GPT-6-Astra achieves 0.0% and 55.0%, respectively. Figure 20 and Appendix I provide task-level comparisons. 

Performance by task information requirements. Application-material-dependent tasks account for 14 of 36 Web tasks, 9 of 29 Game tasks, and all 20 tasks in each of DevOps and Mobile. Across the eight frontier models evaluated in both conditions in all four domains, the mean hybrid advantage on these tasks is 42.0, 23.6, 48.1, and 38.8 percentage points, respectively. On source-specified tasks, the corresponding mean differences are 0.0 points on Web and −0.6 on Game. This distribution connects the aggregate comparison to the tasks’ information requirements: the largest gains occur when agents must turn application materials into working software. Appendix I reports all model-level comparisons on matched task subsets. For source-specified tasks, code-only agents can check behavior through program execution, as the 2048 trajectory in Appendix C illustrates. GUI access adds application-level evidence; completing the repair requires the agent to interpret that evidence and act on it. 

> 35

CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task-level outcomes — Web 

36 tasks · 9 families Task / behavior 

> GPT-6-Astra

C U

> GPT-5.6-Sol

C U

> GPT-5.6-Luna

C U

> GPT-5.6-Terra

C U

> Claude-Opus-5

C U

> Claude-Opus-4.8

C U

> Claude-Sonnet-5

C U

> Claude-Fable-5

C U

> Grok-4.6

C U

> Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol

U

> Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5

U

Canvas 

W01 Viewport rotation 

W02 Nested selection 05 

W03 Nested selection 06 

W04 Nested selection 44 

W05 Nested camera A resize 

W06 Nested camera C resize 

W07 Opposite-edge resize 

W08 Through-edge resize 

W09 Single-to-nested return 

Maps 

W10 Mouse ridge attachment 

W11 Post-wheel reacquisition 

W12 Reset hando ff 

W13 Reset terrain reacquisition 

W14 Reset touch reacquisition 

W15 Reset wheel reacquisition 

W16 Terrain pinch anchor 

Charts 

W17 ECharts linked zoom 

W18 Recharts responsive pie 

Rich text 

W19 Quill paste / scroll 

W20 Slate soft break / scroll 

W21 Tiptap keyboard focus 

Tables 

W22 Menu scroll anchor 

W23 Sticky table columns 

Forms 

W24 Date mask / clear / blur 

W25 ComboBox selection 1 

W26 ComboBox selection 2 

Notebooks 

W27 Shift-click selection 

Layout 

W28 Masonry overlap 

Work fl ow contracts 

W29 Account recovery 

W30 Delegated action 

W31 Current-search export 

W32 Subscription renewal 

W33 Support window 

W34 Tax rounding 

W35 Warehouse cuto ff : anchor 

W36 Warehouse cuto ff : easy 

Success (1) Failure (0) — Unavailable C = Code-only U = CUA 

> Systems: CUA only. Task IDs and full model names are preserved in the accompanying data.

Figure 16: Task-level Web outcomes. Rows cover all 36 Web tasks, grouped by task family. Each frontier model has adjacent code-only (C) and CUA (U) cells; each agent system has one CUA cell. Colors encode the recorded outcome according to the key, and gray em dashes indicate unavailable outcomes. 

36 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task-level outcomes — Game 

29 tasks · 12 families Task / behavior 

> GPT-6-Astra

C U

> GPT-5.6-Sol

C U

> GPT-5.6-Luna

C U

> GPT-5.6-Terra

C U

> Claude-Opus-5

C U

> Claude-Opus-4.8

C U

> Claude-Sonnet-5

C U

> Claude-Fable-5

C U

> Grok-4.6

C U

> Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol

U

> Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5

U

2048 

G01 Seeded restart 002 

G02 Seeded restart 005 

Astray 

G03 Level-2 parallax glass 

Boxel Rebound 

G04 Restart camera 010 

G05 Restart camera 011 

G06 Restart camera 012 

G07 Restart camera 013 

G08 Restart camera 014 

Captain Callisto 

G09 Temporal jetpack 006 

G10 Temporal jetpack 007 

G11 Goal transition 005 

G12 Visual-semantic item 

G13 Collision o ff set 

G14 Conditional physics 

G15 Goal transition 006 

Core Ball 

G16 Attachment contract 

Flappy Bird 

G17 Flight lab 008 

G18 Flight lab 010 

G19 Flight lab 011 

G20 Flight lab 012 

Hextris 

G21 Cascade resettle: stable 

G22 Cascade resettle 

Minesweeper 

G23 Delayed loss identity 002 

G24 Delayed loss identity 003 

Pac-Man 

G25 Mode hando ff 

Signal Weave 

G26 Checkpoint / hazard sync 

Vector Relay 

G27 Deferred ownership 

G28 Primed-pulse hando ff 

Letter Arc 

G29 Finish / replay inspection 

Success (1) Failure (0) — Unavailable C = Code-only U = CUA 

> Systems: CUA only. Task IDs and full model names are preserved in the accompanying data.

Figure 17: Task-level Game outcomes. Rows cover all 29 Game tasks, grouped by source game. Adjacent C and U cells show code-only and CUA outcomes for frontier models; the two system columns show CUA outcomes. The encoding follows Figure 16. 

37 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task-level outcomes — DevOps 

20 tasks · 10 families Task / behavior 

> GPT-6-Astra

C U

> GPT-5.6-Sol

C U

> GPT-5.6-Luna

C U

> GPT-5.6-Terra

C U

> Claude-Opus-5

C U

> Claude-Opus-4.8

C U

> Claude-Sonnet-5

C U

> Claude-Fable-5

C U

> Grok-4.6

C U

> Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol

U

> Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5

U

Trace context 

D01 Await context: base 

D02 Await context: di ff  r1 

Clock correction 

D03 Clock skew: base 

D04 Clock skew: upper r6 

Alert inhibition 

D05 Equal labels: base 

D06 Equal labels: upper r3 

Rate aggregation 

D07 Rate  fi rst: base 

D08 Rate  fi rst: upper r1 

D09 Rate  fi rst: upper r2 

SLO rollups 

D10 Availability: base 

D11 Availability: upper r1 

Log severity 

D12 Severity: base 

D13 Severity: upper r2 

Tail sampling 

D14 Decision window: base 

D15 Decision window: di ff  r2 

Alert routing 

D16 Pending identity: base 

D17 Pending identity: upper r2 

Gauge updates 

D18 Gauge update: r4 

D19 Gauge update: r5 

Scrape deadlines 

D20 Response deadline: di ff  r3 

Success (1) Failure (0) — Unavailable C = Code-only U = CUA 

> Systems: CUA only. Task IDs and full model names are preserved in the accompanying data.

Figure 18: Task-level DevOps outcomes. Rows cover all 20 DevOps tasks, grouped by operational contract. Adjacent C and U cells show code-only and CUA outcomes for frontier models; the two system columns show CUA outcomes. The encoding follows Figure 16. 

38 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task-level outcomes — Mobile 

20 tasks · 12 families Task / behavior 

> GPT-6-Astra

C U

> GPT-5.6-Sol

C U

> GPT-5.6-Luna

C U

> GPT-5.6-Terra

C U

> Claude-Opus-5

C U

> Claude-Opus-4.8

C U

> Claude-Sonnet-5

C U

> Claude-Fable-5

C U

> Grok-4.6

C U

> Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol

U

> Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5

U

Gantt schedules 

M01 Wallchart schedule 005 — — —

M02 Wallchart schedule 013 — — —

M03 Wallchart schedule 008 — — —

M04 Wallchart schedule 004 — — —

M05 Wallchart schedule 009 — — —

M06 Wallchart schedule 010 — — —

M07 Wallchart schedule 016 — — —

M08 Wallchart schedule 001 — — —

M09 Wallchart schedule 015 — — —

Calibration 

M10 Inspection calibration — — —

Marble run 

M11 Marble run — — —

Gear assemblies 

M12 Kinetic gear plan — — —

Mural warp 

M13 Mural warp — — —

Panorama 

M14 Panorama hotspots — — —

Star registration 

M15 Star-plate registration — — —

Packaging proof 

M16 Packaging proof — — —

Relay board 

M17 Stateful relay board — — —

Sprite sequences 

M18 Sprite exposure board — — —

Wallet access 

M19 Wallet entitlement — — —

Way fi nding 

M20 Campus way fi nding — — —

Success (1) Failure (0) — Not evaluated C = Code-only U = CUA ? Grok-4.6: two replacement slots share one success; task linkage unresolved. 

> ??

Figure 19: Task-level Mobile outcomes. Rows cover all 20 Mobile tasks, grouped by application contract. Adjacent C and U cells show code-only and CUA outcomes for frontier models; the two system columns show CUA outcomes. Gray em dashes denote unevaluated models. Grok-4.6’s two question marks identify tasks with one success between them and unresolved individual outcomes (Appendix A.5). Other colors follow Figure 16. 

39 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering Task-paired outcomes under the two access conditions 

Web Δ pp  

> GPT-6-Astra

+38.9  

> GPT-5.6-Sol

+38.9  

> GPT-5.6-Luna

-5.6  

> GPT-5.6-Terra

+2.8  

> Claude-Opus-5

+33.3  

> Claude-Opus-4.8

+11.1  

> Claude-Sonnet-5

-8.3  

> Claude-Fable-5

+27.8  

> Grok-4.6

+25.0 0 50 100 

Game Δ pp  

> GPT-6-Astra

+20.7  

> GPT-5.6-Sol

+0.0  

> GPT-5.6-Luna

+6.9  

> GPT-5.6-Terra

+3.4  

> Claude-Opus-5

+6.9  

> Claude-Opus-4.8

+17.2  

> Claude-Sonnet-5

-3.4  

> Claude-Fable-5

+3.4  

> Grok-4.6

+6.9 0 50 100 

DevOps Δ pp  

> GPT-6-Astra

+80.0  

> GPT-5.6-Sol

+55.0  

> GPT-5.6-Luna

+15.0  

> GPT-5.6-Terra

+25.0  

> Claude-Opus-5

+60.0  

> Claude-Opus-4.8

+55.0  

> Claude-Sonnet-5

+40.0  

> Claude-Fable-5

+50.0  

> Grok-4.6

+65.0 0 50 100 

Mobile Δ pp  

> GPT-6-Astra

+55.0  

> GPT-5.6-Sol

+45.0  

> GPT-5.6-Luna

+35.0  

> GPT-5.6-Terra

+35.0  

> Claude-Opus-5

— 

> Claude-Opus-4.8

+40.0  

> Claude-Sonnet-5

+35.0  

> Claude-Fable-5

+35.0  

> Grok-4.6

+30.0 0 50 100 

Share of tasks (%) · Δ = CUA success − code-only success 

Both solved CUA only Code only Neither solved 

Figure 20: Task-paired outcomes under the two access conditions. Each bar partitions a model’s matched tasks by the joint code-only and CUA outcome. The four segments sum to 100%. Values at right give the CUA minus code-only success difference in percentage points, computed as the share solved only with CUA minus the share solved only with code. Task membership is identical across conditions within each model and domain. Both conditions include source-level execution and command feedback; hybrid CUA additionally provides application screenshots and graphical actions. Information-requirement strata are reported in Table 10. 

40 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Paired outcomes by task information requirements. Tables 9 and 10 stratify the original single-attempt comparison by specification provenance. The aggregate summary uses the same eight frontier models in every domain; the detailed table includes every frontier model evaluated in both conditions in the relevant domain. All rates within a row use exactly the same tasks. The M group includes five Game tasks with bundled graphical reference cards; its other 58 tasks use runtime-supplied materials. These comparisons describe performance across task requirements under the two access conditions. Table 9: Success by task information requirement, averaged over the eight frontier models evaluated under both access conditions in all four domains. Each domain–type group uses the same tasks for both conditions. M: application-material dependent; S: source-specified. The labels identify specification provenance; both groups require implementation and verification. Full model results appear in Appendix I. 

Domain Type Tasks Code-only Hybrid CUA ∆ (pp) Web S 22 23.9 23.9 +0.0 Web M 14 8.9 50.9 +42.0 Game S 20 10.6 10.0 -0.6 Game M 9 2.8 26.4 +23.6 DevOps M 20 0.6 48.8 +48.1 Mobile M 20 0.6 39.4 +38.8 Table 10: Task success by information requirement (%). Each row compares the same tasks and original single attempts under code-only and hybrid CUA access. M and S follow Appendix A.3; ∆ is hybrid minus code-only in percentage points. DevOps and Mobile contain no S tasks; their S results are not applicable. Only models evaluated under both access conditions are included. Type Model N Code-only Hybrid CUA ∆

Web 

S GPT-6-Astra 22 27.3 54.5 +27.3 S GPT-5.6-Sol 22 27.3 36.4 +9.1 S GPT-5.6-Luna 22 13.6 4.5 -9.1 S GPT-5.6-Terra 22 18.2 13.6 -4.5 S Claude-Opus-5 22 27.3 31.8 +4.5 S Claude-Opus-4.8 22 22.7 18.2 -4.5 S Claude-Sonnet-5 22 13.6 0.0 -13.6 S Claude-Fable-5 22 27.3 27.3 +0.0 S Grok-4.6 22 40.9 36.4 -4.5 M GPT-6-Astra 14 28.6 85.7 +57.1 M GPT-5.6-Sol 14 7.1 92.9 +85.7 M GPT-5.6-Luna 14 7.1 7.1 +0.0 M GPT-5.6-Terra 14 0.0 14.3 +14.3 M Claude-Opus-5 14 14.3 92.9 +78.6 M Claude-Opus-4.8 14 7.1 42.9 +35.7 M Claude-Sonnet-5 14 0.0 0.0 +0.0 M Claude-Fable-5 14 7.1 78.6 +71.4 M Grok-4.6 14 14.3 85.7 +71.4 

Game 

S GPT-6-Astra 20 25.0 25.0 +0.0 S GPT-5.6-Sol 20 15.0 10.0 -5.0 S GPT-5.6-Luna 20 0.0 0.0 +0.0 S GPT-5.6-Terra 20 5.0 5.0 +0.0 S Claude-Opus-5 20 20.0 10.0 -10.0 S Claude-Opus-4.8 20 0.0 15.0 +15.0 S Claude-Sonnet-5 20 10.0 0.0 -10.0 S Claude-Fable-5 20 15.0 10.0 -5.0 S Grok-4.6 20 15.0 15.0 +0.0 M GPT-6-Astra 9 0.0 66.7 +66.7 M GPT-5.6-Sol 9 0.0 11.1 +11.1 

> 41 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Type Model N Code-only Hybrid CUA ∆

M GPT-5.6-Luna 9 0.0 22.2 +22.2 M GPT-5.6-Terra 9 0.0 11.1 +11.1 M Claude-Opus-5 9 0.0 44.4 +44.4 M Claude-Opus-4.8 9 11.1 33.3 +22.2 M Claude-Sonnet-5 9 0.0 11.1 +11.1 M Claude-Fable-5 9 11.1 33.3 +22.2 M Grok-4.6 9 0.0 22.2 +22.2 

DevOps 

M GPT-6-Astra 20 0.0 80.0 +80.0 M GPT-5.6-Sol 20 0.0 55.0 +55.0 M GPT-5.6-Luna 20 0.0 15.0 +15.0 M GPT-5.6-Terra 20 0.0 25.0 +25.0 M Claude-Opus-5 20 0.0 60.0 +60.0 M Claude-Opus-4.8 20 0.0 55.0 +55.0 M Claude-Sonnet-5 20 0.0 40.0 +40.0 M Claude-Fable-5 20 5.0 55.0 +50.0 M Grok-4.6 20 0.0 65.0 +65.0 

Mobile 

M GPT-6-Astra 20 0.0 55.0 +55.0 M GPT-5.6-Sol 20 0.0 45.0 +45.0 M GPT-5.6-Luna 20 0.0 35.0 +35.0 M GPT-5.6-Terra 20 0.0 35.0 +35.0 M Claude-Opus-4.8 20 0.0 40.0 +40.0 M Claude-Sonnet-5 20 0.0 35.0 +35.0 M Claude-Fable-5 20 5.0 40.0 +35.0 M Grok-4.6 20 0.0 30.0 +30.0 

42 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

J Interaction workloads 

Time and workload measures. Time is measured overthe agent’s development episode. Agent time per success divides mean episode time by task-success probability, using equal domain weights for cross-domain summaries. Appendix A describes the evaluation protocol, condition comparisons, and workload accounting. GPT-6-Astra achieves the highest four-domain task success rate, 59.9%, and the lowest agent time per success, 7.2 minutes, among the eight frontier models (Figure 21). Its Hybrid episodes average 46.3 model responses with 145.8 output tokens per response. GPT-5.6-Sol uses 37.7 responses and 203.7 tokens per response, with 8.7 agent minutes per success. These profiles characterize how each model distributes its work across interaction rounds and response length. Hybrid execution profile 

Steps / task 

0–80 

Tokens / response 

0–800 

Agent min / success 

0–80 GPT-6-Astra 46.3 146 7.2 

Claude-Fable-5 51.1 617 35.9 

Grok-4.6 56.7 557 31.8 

GPT-5.6-Sol 37.7 204 8.7 

Claude-Opus-4.8 54.5 472 26.2 

GPT-5.6-Terra 23.9 307 12.0 

Claude-Sonnet-5 69.4 547 60.9 

GPT-5.6-Luna 27.9 272 15.0 

Figure 21: Hybrid execution efficiency. Model responses per task, output tokens per response, and agent minutes per success for eight frontier models. Episode workloads are averaged within each domain and then weighted equally across the four domains. Agent minutes per success divides that mean cost by the full-inventory task-success probability. Appendix A.6 specifies workload coverage. 

Success and episode time. Figure 6(a) summarizes task success and mean development time across four equally weighted domains. GPT-6-Astra achieves 59.9% task success with a mean of 4.3 minutes per attempt; GPT-5.6-Sol reaches 42.2% at 3.7 minutes. The comparison covers nine models and agent systems evaluated in all four domains. Appendix G provides the domain-level profiles. 

Effort on shared successful tasks. On Web tasks successfully repaired by both models, GPT-6-Astra uses fewer responses on 83.3% of tasks shared with Grok-4.6 and 72.2% shared with Claude-Opus-5 (Figure 6(b)). Median response counts are 28.5 versus 43.5 and 21.5 versus 27.5, respectively. Each comparison uses its own set of 18 shared successful tasks, linking interaction effort to the same completed repairs. Appendix K gives the task-level pairs and resource comparisons across domains. System-level results also show different development profiles: Claude Code with Claude-Opus-5 achieves 65.0% on DevOps at a median of 4.4 minutes, while the frontier model achieves 60.0% at 9.3 minutes. Appendix L gives the 

> 43

CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

response, token, and system-specific workload distributions. 

44 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 0 50 100 

> GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6

Web   

> 050 100

Game   

> 050 100

DevOps   

> 050 100

—

Mobile               

> 100 300 1k 3k
> GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6
> 100 300 1k 3k 100 300 1k 3k 100 300 1k 3k

—              

> 1310 30
> GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6
> 1310 30 1310 30 1310 30

—

Interaction workloads across four domains 

a Interaction steps 

Model responses / task 

b Response length 

Output tokens / response · log scale 

c Episode time 

Agent time / task (min) · log scale   

> Code only CUA Median and interquartile range

Figure 22: Interaction steps, response length, and development time. Hollow circles show code-only and filled circles show CUA. Markers give task medians; intervals span the 25th–75th percentiles. Steps count completed model responses. Response length is recorded output tokens divided by completed responses for each episode, summarized across tasks. Time covers the agent episode. Each metric uses the same eligible tasks across conditions within a model and domain, retaining the full range of task outcomes. Resource coverage is specified in Appendix A.6. 

45 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

K Effort on shared successful tasks 0.25 1 4

Web nGPT-5.6-Sol 20 

GPT-5.6-Luna 2

GPT-5.6-Terra 5

Claude-Opus-5 18 

Claude-Opus-4.8 9

Claude-Sonnet-5 — 0

Claude-Fable-5 16 

Grok-4.6 18   

> 0.25 14

Game n  

> 22234142
> 0.25 14

DevOps n  

> 11 3512 10 811 12
> 0.25 14

Mobile n

> 977

— —8785   

> 0.125 0.25 0.5 1

GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 —

Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6            

> 0.125 0.25 0.5 10.125 0.25 0.5 10.125 0.25 0.5 1

—   

> 0.125 0.5 14

GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 —

Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6            

> 0.125 0.5 140.125 0.5 140.125 0.5 14

—

Eff ort on shared successful tasks 

GPT-6-Astra ÷ peer · CUA · median and interquartile range 

a Steps (model responses) b Recorded output tokens / response c Agent time 

Per-task GPT-6-Astra / peer ratio (log scale) · below 1 = lower GPT-6-Astra e ff ort 

> n: common successful tasks; identical cohorts across all three metrics

Figure 23: Effort ratios on shared successful tasks. Each comparison uses the tasks successfully completed by both GPT-6-Astra and the corresponding frontier model with CUA. For each task, effort is divided by the peer’s effort; markers show median ratios and intervals span the 25th–75th percentiles. The line at one indicates equal effort. Axes are logarithmic. Steps count model responses; response length uses recorded output tokens per response; time covers the agent episode. Each peer has its own shared-success cohort, whose size appears in the top row. Pairs include executions with resource measurements for both models (Appendix A.6). 

46 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 0 25 50 75 100 

Model responses 

> G18 G17 G16 G15 G14 G13 G12 G11 G10 G09 G08 G07 G06 G05 G04 G03 G02 G01

n = 18 · medians: 28.5 / 43.5 GPT-6-Astra uses fewer responses on 15/18 tasks 

a GPT-6-Astra vs Grok-4.6     

> 025 50 75 100

Model responses 

> O18 O17 O16 O15 O14 O13 O12 O11 O10 O09 O08 O07 O06 O05 O04 O03 O02 O01

n = 18 · medians: 21.5 / 27.5 GPT-6-Astra uses fewer responses on 13/18 tasks 

b GPT-6-Astra vs Claude-Opus-5 

Web: responses on shared successful tasks 

Two model comparisons · CUA · one paired row per task 

Each connector joins the two response counts for the same successful task. 

> Rows sorted by peer response count; task identities are included in the companion CSV.

GPT-6-Astra Grok-4.6 Claude-Opus-5 

Figure 24: Response counts on shared successful Web tasks. Each connected pair gives GPT-6-Astra’s and its peer’s response counts on one task. The GPT-6-Astra–Grok-4.6 comparison covers 18 shared successes, with medians of 28.5 and 43.5 responses. The GPT-6-Astra–Claude-Opus-5 comparison also covers 18 shared successes, with medians of 21.5 and 27.5 responses. Each panel uses its corresponding pair’s shared-success task set. 

47 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

L Resource profiles 100 10k 1M 

Web   

> 100 10k 1M

Game   

> 100 10k 1M

DevOps   

> 100 10k 1M

——

Mobile            

> 010k 1M 010k 1M 010k 1M 010k 1M

——

Recorded input and cache usage 

CUA condition · task medians and interquartile ranges GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

> FRONTIER MODELS NATIVE SYSTEMS

a Recorded input tokens / task log scale GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

> FRONTIER MODELS NATIVE SYSTEMS

b Recorded cached-input tokens / task linear near 0; log above 1k — Unavailable 

Figure 25: Recorded input and cached-input tokens per CUA task. Markers show medians and intervals span the 25th–75th percentiles over each entry’s measured CUA cohort. The two counters retain their provider-specific definitions and are summarized separately. Input tokens use a logarithmic axis. Cached-input tokens use a symmetric logarithmic axis with a linear region from zero to 1,000 tokens; tick labels give token counts. Token summaries use episodes with complete recorded usage. 

48 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 0 40 80 

Web 

0 40 80 

Game 

0 40 80 

DevOps 

0 40 80 ——

Mobile 

0 40 80 0 40 80 0 40 80 0 40 80 ——2k 10k 100k 2k 10k 100k 2k 10k 100k 2k 10k 100k ——

Interaction and output resources 

CUA condition · task medians and interquartile ranges GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

> FRONTIER MODELS NATIVE SYSTEMS

a GUI actions / task 

GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

> FRONTIER MODELS NATIVE SYSTEMS

b Recorded screenshots / task 

GPT-6-Astra GPT-5.6-Sol GPT-5.6-Luna GPT-5.6-Terra Claude-Opus-5 Claude-Opus-4.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 Claude-Fable-5 Grok-4.6 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

> FRONTIER MODELS NATIVE SYSTEMS

c Recorded output tokens / task log scale — Unavailable 

Figure 26: CUA interaction and output profiles. Markers show medians and intervals span the 25th–75th percentiles over each entry’s measured task cohort. Circles denote frontier models and diamonds denote agent systems. GUI actions and recorded screenshots use linear axes; output tokens use a logarithmic axis. Screenshot counts retain each source’s capture definition, and token summaries use complete recorded usage. 

49 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 0 50 100 150 

Completed items / task 

> Web n=36 Game n=29 DevOps n=20 Mobile n=20

a Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol    

> 050 100 150

Native assistant turns / task  

> Web n=36 Game n=29 DevOps n=20 Mobile

—

b Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 

Native system step counts 

CUA condition · separate native units 

> Pale points: tasks. Diamond: median. Thick line: interquartile range. — Unavailable

Figure 27: Native agent-system steps with CUA. Codex with GPT-5.6-Sol counts completed items; Claude Code with Claude-Opus-5 counts native assistant turns. The two step units appear in separately labeled panels. Pale points show individual tasks, diamonds give medians, and thick intervals span the 25th–75th percentiles. Each panel uses all available native step measurements for the system and domain. 

50 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

M Successful repair trajectories 

These cases illustrate four repair mechanisms through first-eligible trajectories from the single-attempt evaluation. Each case follows the agent’s observations, source edits, and verification results. 

Interaction guides successive edits. In the Web nested-selection task, GPT-6-Astra repairs resizing and then tests a drag beyond the containing frame. The resulting selection behavior motivates a second edit: the group’s hit testing is extended to consider selectable descendants outside its bounds. The agent repeats the interaction and submits a passing patch, completing both geometry and selection behavior (Figure 28). S5a WEB 

## Preserve nested selection after resizing 

> Nested Fabric selection 05 · released GPT-6-Astra CUA attempt

1 Observation schematic · reviewed interaction sequence 

After resize repair 

> inner frame

Selection clears; Blue stays. 

> Reviewed images 0006–0007

After targeting repair 

> inner frame

Selection persists; Blue moves. 

> Reviewed images 0010–0011

2 Consequential change · source review 

Keep crossing geometry aligned 

Signed spans locate the anchor; absolute dimensions commit the shape. 

Search visible descendants 

_checkTarget descends into interactive groups when child paint over fl ows. 

3 Evaluated behavior · released outcome record 

PASS Nested-A and Single-C work fl ows complete 

> 21 scored observations and 74 actions include over fl ow selection and movement.
> Evidence: task review + released outcome. Source changes are summarized from the retained review; schematics illustrate the interaction.

Figure 28: Successive interaction-guided edits on Web. GPT-6-Astra repairs resizing, tests selection beyond the containing frame, and extends hit testing to selectable descendants. The scene panels are conceptual schematics of the reviewed trajectory; the edit description summarizes the source change. The resulting patch passes the task’s evaluator. 

51 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

State updates jointly restore the scene. In the Game checkpoint-restart task, GPT-6-Astra reconstructs lift phase from a faded reference frame, restores camera progress in course coordinates, and reattaches the player at its saved support-relative height. The patch also preserves the checkpoint against updates from the beacon’s static map cell. Independent build and state-replay checks pass, establishing the combined repair (Figure 29). S5b GAME 

## Restore checkpoint state from geometry 

Boxel Rebound · Level 50 restart-camera .013 · released  fi rst-valid attempt 

1 Observation evidence · retained transcript 

The checkpoint stores geometry; motion phase and camera position are reconstructed from that state. 

> Paraphrase · GPT-6-Astra, turn 18 · retained transcript

2 Source change · reconstruct, then reattach 

Lift reconstruction schematic 

> Earlier half-cycle is selected. Echo height here is illustrative.

Exact patch excerpts 

this.cameraProgress = progress; this.x = -this.cameraProgress; this.supportId = support.id; this.y = support.top+ this.supportOffset; 

Camera uses checkpoint course space; player height uses the restored support. The lift phase is recovered by inverting the cosine curve in the source patch. 

3 Evaluated behavior · native veri fi er 

PASS Deterministic state replay passes 

The submitted restart repair passes the task-speci fi c state check and build.   

> Evidence: September 21 attempt-1 transcript, source.patch and veri fi er_report.json. The schematic visualizes restoreCheckpointFrame; the pass comes from the veri fi er.
> 01400 2800
> Lift phase (ms)
> 030 60
> Rise above base
> echo height

Figure 29: Coordinated restart restoration in Game. GPT-6-Astra combines lift-phase recovery, course-space camera restoration, and support-relative player attachment. The phase curve is a source-based schematic with an illustrative echo height, and the turn-18 text paraphrases the released first-valid trajectory. Deterministic state replay verifies the resulting repair. This episode belongs to the single-attempt evaluation in Table 8. 

52 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Live behavior identifies the operative contract. In the DevOps gauge task, GPT-6-Astra uses a pulse–pulse–settle sequence to infer each endpoint’s update mode. The repair resets that mode at each epoch and preserves receipt order across rollout transitions (Figure 30). This connects visual observations of the service’s responses to the semantics implemented in code. S5c DEVOPS 

## Infer each producer’s gauge-update semantics 

StatsD gauge update modes · task 9 · released GPT-6-Astra CUA attempt 

1 Observed behavior · original capture 0009 

Before the  fi nal repair 

Signed pulses overwrite the gauge. For workers.north.headroom: 

Tokens 40 → +6 → +6 → +0 Stored 40 → 6 → 6 → 0 

Same capture · enlarged update-history detail (unchanged crop) 

2 Source change · learn a mode before applying updates 

Provisioning pulses identify delta vs. snapshot semantics for each endpoint. 

const relative = mode === 'delta' && /^[+-]/.test(measurement.token); const value = relative ? before + measurement.value : measurement.value; 

Lexical signs govern addition; unsigned readings replace. Modes are relearned each epoch. 

3 Evaluated behavior · native browser veri fi er 

PASS Gauge transitions and replay checks pass 

The  fi nal repair passes native state, receipt-order and epoch-speci fi c mode checks.  

> Evidence: original screenshot 0009; src/ingest.mjs, src/receiver.mjs and src/update.mjs patch; veri fi er-report.json. The observation precedes the fi nal repair; evaluated behavior is reported separately.

Figure 30: Recovering gauge-update semantics in DevOps. The recorded observation and its update-history crop show behavior during development. Opening provisioning pulses reveal producer update modes; the source excerpts preserve signed update tokens and apply the inferred modes. The final browser check verifies GPT-6-Astra’s repair. 

53 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Visual structure becomes executable behavior. On Mobile, GPT-6-Astra reconstructs all 23 gear relations and implements their phase, angle, and editing behavior (Figure 31). In the sprite task, it recovers all 28 approved pose assignments together with timing and transport behavior. Both repairs carry precise visual relationships through the application’s interactive operations. S5d MOBILE 

## Recover gear connections from the received drawings 

Kinetic gear plan · t12 · released GPT-6-Astra CUA attempt 

1 Visual evidence · original drawing-view captures 

Capture 019 · Crank quay Capture 026 · Wing and water 

Shared axis Open belt 

Enlarged maker sheets expose concentric parts and belt routing. 

2 Source change · correct the integration graph 

{from:'W02', to:'W03', kind:'axis'}, {from:'W03', to:'W04', kind:'mesh'}, {from:'W06', to:'W09', kind:'crossed belt'}, {from:'W06', to:'W18', kind:'open belt'}, 

The patch also makes angle entry immediate and preserves direction through Undo. 

3 Evaluated behavior · six task assertions 

PASS Both editions and editing work fl ows pass 

Motion, phase drafts, saved phases, Undo/reload, edition resets and originals all pass.  

> Evidence: original captures 019/026; plan.mjs.di ff , app.mjs.di ff and released outcome record. Captures are identi fi ed by their recorded index and displayed view; arrows identify drawing relationships.

Figure 31: Translating a Mobile drawing into gear relationships. The two recorded drawing views guide GPT-6-Astra’s graph repair. The source excerpt shows four selected added edges from the patch. The completed repair passes all six task assertions. 

54 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering  

> M.1 Paired repairs and remaining capability demands

Selection after a geometry change. The nested-selection comparison uses the same task under hybrid access. GPT-6-Astra repairs signed resizing and then extends descendant hit testing after its own overflow drag loses selection. Its final patch passes both the resize and selection workflows. GPT-5.6-Sol removes the resize clamps but reverts its experimental hit-testing changes before submission; Claude-Opus-5 also removes the clamps without repairing descendant discovery. Both patches pass the reached resize prefix but lose selection when the visible object is pressed outside the containing frame. This contrast links their different outcomes to the second repair, which preserves the interaction after the geometry change. 

Exact visual relations and animation assignments. In the kinetic-gear task, GPT-6-Astra recovers the 23 driving relations. GPT-5.6-Sol’s reconstruction selects the wrong immediate driver for two compound assemblies: it substitutes an outer rim for the connected inner rim, changing downstream motion. In the sprite task, GPT-6-Astra recovers all 28 approved pose assignments, while GPT-5.6-Terra swaps two crossing poses and selects an incorrect late catching pose. GPT-5.6-Sol completes the sprite task on its second independent attempt. These comparisons distinguish the accuracy of the recovered relations from the ability to implement the surrounding interaction and animation machinery. 

Service semantics and complementary model strengths. In the gauge-calibration task, GPT-6-Astra is the only successful entry. It infers update modes from the opening pulse–pulse–settle sequence, resets them at each deployment epoch, and preserves receipt order. Other service tasks favor different agents. Claude-Opus-4.8 uniquely repairs the receiver-selector task by propagating route metadata into rule compilation and retaining the required selector labels. GPT-6-Astra instead separates literal and templated enrichments without recovering the route’s actual identity keys. In log normalization, Grok-4.6 and Codex combine delivered format with producer provenance; GPT-6-Astra changes the format selection but leaves relayed syslog severities interpreted under the wrong convention. The final verifier outcomes match these differences in the submitted implementations. 

Coupled game state and dense schedule dependencies. No entry completes Core Ball in the original single-attempt evaluation. GPT-6-Astra’s patch corrects impact-angle ownership but leaves failures in waiting-shot promotion, post-commit ordering, pace-change persistence, completion, and rejected-collision occupancy. In Mobile, the original hybrid attempts leave all nine schedule variants unsolved. The inspected GPT-6-Astra schedule patch recovers starts and durations but misassigns two dependency endpoints and one lag; its self-tests encode the same incorrect transcription. The repeated evaluation adds one GPT-6-Astra schedule success on the third attempt. These observations identify the joint recovery of event ordering and relational constraints as a demand that remains beyond the successful local repairs in these cases. 

> 55 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

N Patch correctness and task success 

We report three complementary measures for each model and access condition. Patch correctness averages Pi, task success averages Si = PiUi, and the third measure averages Pi(1 −Ui) over the same N task attempts. All three are expressed as percentages. The first measure summarizes verified repairs; the latter two partition them by trajectory validation. Table 11 gives the results across the four domains. 

Table 11: Patch correctness and task success (%). Patch reports P = 1; Task reports PU = 1; the third column reports P = 1,U = 0. Each evaluated entry uses the same N tasks and single attempts as Table 8. An em dash denotes an unevaluated condition. Code-only Hybrid CUA Model / system Patch Task P=1,U=0 Patch Task P=1,U=0

Web (N = 36) GPT-6-Astra 27.8 27.8 0.0 66.7 66.7 0.0 GPT-5.6-Sol 19.4 19.4 0.0 58.3 58.3 0.0 GPT-5.6-Luna 11.1 11.1 0.0 13.9 5.6 8.3 GPT-5.6-Terra 11.1 11.1 0.0 13.9 13.9 0.0 Claude-Opus-5 22.2 22.2 0.0 55.6 55.6 0.0 Claude-Opus-4.8 16.7 16.7 0.0 55.6 27.8 27.8 Claude-Sonnet-5 8.3 8.3 0.0 50.0 0.0 50.0 Claude-Fable-5 22.2 19.4 2.8 55.6 47.2 8.3 Grok-4.6 30.6 30.6 0.0 58.3 55.6 2.8 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol — — — 55.6 55.6 0.0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 — — — 55.6 55.6 0.0 

Game (N = 29) GPT-6-Astra 17.2 17.2 0.0 37.9 37.9 0.0 GPT-5.6-Sol 10.3 10.3 0.0 10.3 10.3 0.0 GPT-5.6-Luna 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.9 6.9 0.0 GPT-5.6-Terra 3.4 3.4 0.0 10.3 6.9 3.4 Claude-Opus-5 13.8 13.8 0.0 20.7 20.7 0.0 Claude-Opus-4.8 3.4 3.4 0.0 20.7 20.7 0.0 Claude-Sonnet-5 6.9 6.9 0.0 10.3 3.4 6.9 Claude-Fable-5 13.8 13.8 0.0 20.7 17.2 3.4 Grok-4.6 10.3 10.3 0.0 20.7 17.2 3.4 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol — — — 17.2 17.2 0.0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 — — — 20.7 20.7 0.0 

DevOps (N = 20) GPT-6-Astra 0.0 0.0 0.0 80.0 80.0 0.0 GPT-5.6-Sol 0.0 0.0 0.0 55.0 55.0 0.0 GPT-5.6-Luna 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.0 15.0 0.0 GPT-5.6-Terra 0.0 0.0 0.0 25.0 25.0 0.0 Claude-Opus-5 0.0 0.0 0.0 60.0 60.0 0.0 Claude-Opus-4.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 55.0 55.0 0.0 Claude-Sonnet-5 0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 40.0 0.0 Claude-Fable-5 5.0 5.0 0.0 55.0 55.0 0.0 Grok-4.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 65.0 65.0 0.0 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol — — — 55.0 55.0 0.0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 — — — 65.0 65.0 0.0 

Mobile (N = 20) GPT-6-Astra 0.0 0.0 0.0 55.0 55.0 0.0 GPT-5.6-Sol 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.0 45.0 0.0 GPT-5.6-Luna 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.0 35.0 0.0 GPT-5.6-Terra 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.0 35.0 0.0 Claude-Opus-5 — — — — — —Claude-Opus-4.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 40.0 0.0 Claude-Sonnet-5 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.0 35.0 0.0 Claude-Fable-5 5.0 5.0 0.0 40.0 40.0 0.0 Grok-4.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 30.0 30.0 0.0 

> 56 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Table 11 (continued) Code-only Hybrid CUA Model / system Patch Task P=1,U=0 Patch Task P=1,U=0Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol — — — 40.0 40.0 0.0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 — — — — — —

57 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

O Extended related work  

> O.1 Coding and software engineering benchmarks

HumanEval measures whether programs synthesized from docstrings satisfy functional tests (Chen et al., 2021). Live-CodeBench uses newly collected programming problems to evaluate generation, self-repair, execution, and test-output prediction (Jain et al., 2024). BigCodeBench broadens function-level evaluation to complex instructions and compositions of library calls (Zhuo et al., 2025). These benchmarks make functional correctness measurable while varying the program understanding and tool knowledge required to produce a solution. Repository-level benchmarks introduce dependencies between changes across an existing project. SWE-bench evaluates issue resolution in real repositories (Jimenez et al., 2024); SWE-bench Pro emphasizes longer engineering tasks involving substantial, often multi-file changes (Deng et al., 2025). SWE-Lancer includes both independent engineering work, from bug fixes to feature implementations, and decisions among implementation proposals. Its independent engineering tasks use end-to-end tests (Miserendino et al., 2025). Terminal-Bench evaluates multi-step work in command-line environments, pairing tasks with dedicated environments, reference solutions, and verification tests (Merrill et al., 2026). These settings establish that SWE evaluation extends beyond isolated code generation. CUA-SWE adds direct interaction with the running software to this development process, so that agents can connect implementation choices with observed application behavior.  

> O.2 Computer-use benchmarks and visual grounding

Mind2Web provides demonstrations of tasks on real websites and studies generalization across websites and domains (Deng et al., 2023). WebArena supplies reproducible, functional websites and evaluates task completion (Zhou et al., 2023). VisualWebArena adds tasks for which visual information is needed to identify the appropriate objects and actions (Koh et al., 2024). WebVoyager studies end-to-end interaction with live websites and uses a multimodal model to judge task completion (He et al., 2024). These evaluation settings differ in whether they use recorded demonstrations or online execution and in how they assess the final outcome. OSWorld supports tasks across desktop applications with execution-based evaluation (Xie et al., 2024). Windows Agent Arena adapts this approach to a real Windows environment (Bonatti et al., 2024), while AndroidWorld defines mobile tasks with programmatic initialization, success checks, and teardown (Rawles et al., 2024). ScreenSpot-Pro isolates a constituent capability: locating interface targets in high-resolution screenshots of professional applications (Li et al., 2025). Grounding accuracy, successful navigation, and correct software changes measure different capabilities. CUA-SWE requires agents to coordinate interface interaction with source or configuration changes, and checks whether the resulting software satisfies the task requirements.  

> O.3 Visual and interactive software development

SWE-bench Multimodal introduces images into issues and tests involving user-facing JavaScript software (Yang et al., 2024b). Design2Code studies the reconstruction of webpages from reference screenshots, with visual metrics and human evaluation (Si et al., 2025). WebGen-Bench evaluates websites generated from natural-language requirements by using a navigation agent to exercise and check their functionality (Lu et al., 2025). GameDevBench studies development in a game engine and investigates image- and video-based feedback during implementation (Chi et al., 2026). Together, these works show how visual information enters development as a specification, an observation, or an evaluation signal. CUA-SWE emphasizes observations acquired while using the software: the agent chooses what to inspect and how to interact, then relates the observed behavior to its changes. Its task-specific tests check explicit requirements across web development, game development, mobile app development, and DevOps.  

> O.4 Agent interfaces and post-training

SWE-agent studies interfaces for repository navigation, editing, and execution (Yang et al., 2024a). OpenHands provides a platform for software agents with code, command-line, and browser tools (Wang et al., 2024). On the computer-use side, Agent S2 combines generalist planning with specialist components for interaction (Agashe et al., 2025). UI-TARS learns screenshot-grounded interaction policies (Qin et al., 2025), and OpenCUA provides computer-use demonstrations, data-processing infrastructure, and trained agent models (Wang et al., 2025). AndroidControl studies how training data 

> 58 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

scale and instruction granularity affect mobile-agent performance (Li et al., 2024). These approaches inform the interfaces and supervision through which an agent learns to act. CUA-SWE provides a task environment in which coding actions and computer use belong to the same development episode, with executable feedback on the software produced by that episode. 

O.5 Hybrid coding and computer-use environments 

Programming with Pixels provides a visual IDE for diverse SWE tasks and evaluates both visual interaction and access to file-editing, shell, and IDE APIs. Its programmatic verifiers can check compilation and test outcomes independently of the agent’s interaction channel (Aggarwal & Welleck, 2025). This directly connects software engineering with computer use and executable evaluation. WeaveBench studies long-horizon work across graphical interfaces, command-line tools, and code in multiple domains. Its trajectory-aware agentic judge examines artifacts and interaction evidence against task requirements (Li et al., 2026). CUA-SWE organizes this combination around software engineering tasks with deterministic tests of the resulting im-plementation and behavior. The benchmark, evaluation pipeline, and post-training environment share these executable requirements. This supports the study of how coding agents choose when to use software, acquire visual feedback, revise code, and verify the consequences of their changes. 

> 59 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

P Quantitative analysis of development trajectories 

We analyze interaction counts from 2,040 evaluation attempts and detailed annotations of 214 trajectories, complementing the examples in Appendix M with measurements of observation, implementation, and verification behavior. 

P.1 Evaluation sample and annotation procedure 

Coverage and sampling. The records comprise 720 Web, 580 Game, 400 DevOps, and 340 Mobile attempts, with the task-success outcomes of Table 8. Interaction counts use the full collection. Detailed review selects up to two failures and one success per model–domain–condition combination, using a fixed hash ranking of task identities within each outcome stratum. The sample contains 59 Web, 59 Game, 52 DevOps, and 44 Mobile trajectories: 154 failures and 60 successes across 77 evaluated combinations. Review examines instructions, interactions, authored patches, verifier findings, and relevant screenshots. Annotation counts describe this stratified sample; outcome associations weight each attempt by Nh/nh,where Nh and nh are its stratum’s population and sample sizes. 

Annotations and outcomes. Annotations distinguish relevant runtime information, relevant GUI behavior, substantive edits, and GUI checks of an edited revision. Runtime information includes execution of product code in tests or simulations; static source inspection alone does not qualify. Fields with insufficient evidence remain unknown. We report task success 

Si = PiUi and patch correctness Pi separately. Reviewers annotated the sample; a second reviewer annotated 32 overlapping trajectories before seeing the primary labels, followed by adjudication. Section P.6 reports original agreement and scope. 

P.2 Failure stages across models and domains 

A taxonomy of development behavior. We annotate five overlapping stages: observation-acquisition gaps (O), where relevant evidence has not been acquired; incorrect interpretation (Perc) of observed evidence; mistaken diagnosis (D) of the underlying mechanism; implementation errors or incomplete repairs (I); and verification-coverage gaps (V), including unexamined interactions or checks of stale revisions. Labels describe evidenced behavior, including subsequently corrected errors, rather than mutually exclusive terminal causes. 

Domain profiles. Among 84 sampled hybrid failures, implementation errors or incomplete repairs occur in 61 trajectories (21 of 22 in Game), observation gaps in 59, and verification gaps in 82. Verification gaps also occur in 36 of 41 sampled hybrid successes, reflecting incomplete coverage beyond a repaired interaction. Code-only O/V labels also reflect the condition’s exclusion of GUI access. Tables 12 and 13 retain separate conditions and unknown counts. Table 12: Failure-stage annotations by domain and access condition. Each cell gives supported/not observed/unknown counts among n sampled task failures. O: observation; Perc: interpretation; D: diagnosis; I: implementation; V: verification coverage. Stages may overlap.                                                                

> Domain Condition nOPerc DIVWeb Code-only 18 18/0/0 0/18/0 2/14/2 5/0/13 18/0/0 Web Hybrid 22 16/6/0 6/13/3 6/8/8 12/3/7 21/1/0 Game Code-only 18 18/0/0 0/16/2 3/13/2 16/0/2 18/0/0 Game Hybrid 22 15/7/0 6/12/4 7/9/6 21/0/1 22/0/0 DevOps Code-only 18 18/0/0 1/16/1 14/0/4 16/0/2 18/0/0 DevOps Hybrid 22 13/8/1 6/12/4 1/17/4 15/0/7 22/0/0 Mobile Code-only 16 16/0/0 1/15/0 9/7/0 14/1/1 16/0/0 Mobile Hybrid 18 15/1/2 2/13/3 0/16/2 13/3/2 17/1/0
> 60 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

Table 13: Failure-stage counts for each model and domain. Cells report supported/unknown counts; the remaining annotations are not observed. Counts describe the outcome-stratified review sample, with at most two failed attempts per model, domain, and condition. Stage definitions are shared with Table 12. Model / system Condition n O Perc D I V

Web 

GPT-6-Astra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 GPT-6-Astra Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/1 1/1 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 0/2 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 0/2 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/1 0/2 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Hybrid 2 2/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 Claude-Opus-5 Hybrid 2 0/0 0/2 0/2 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/1 1/1 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Hybrid 2 1/0 1/0 1/0 0/0 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Hybrid 2 0/0 0/1 0/0 1/0 1/0 Claude-Fable-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 0/2 2/0 Claude-Fable-5 Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 Grok-4.6 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 0/2 2/0 Grok-4.6 Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/1 1/1 2/0 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 2/0 2/0 0/2 0/2 2/0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 Hybrid 2 1/0 2/0 1/1 2/0 2/0 

Game 

GPT-6-Astra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-6-Astra Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Code-only 2 2/0 0/1 0/1 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Hybrid 2 0/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 Claude-Opus-5 Hybrid 2 1/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Hybrid 2 2/0 2/0 0/2 2/0 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Hybrid 2 2/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Fable-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/1 0/1 2/0 2/0 Claude-Fable-5 Hybrid 2 0/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Grok-4.6 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Grok-4.6 Hybrid 2 2/0 0/2 0/2 1/1 2/0 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 0/0 1/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 Hybrid 2 2/0 0/2 1/1 2/0 2/0 

DevOps 

GPT-6-Astra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-6-Astra Hybrid 2 0/1 0/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 2/0 0/1 0/1 1/1 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Hybrid 2 2/0 1/0 1/1 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Hybrid 2 2/0 0/1 0/1 0/2 2/0 

61 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Table 13 (continued) Model / system Condition n O Perc D I VClaude-Opus-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-5 Hybrid 2 1/0 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/1 1/1 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Hybrid 2 2/0 1/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Code-only 2 2/0 1/1 1/1 2/0 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Hybrid 2 2/0 0/1 0/1 2/0 2/0 Claude-Fable-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Fable-5 Hybrid 2 1/0 0/1 0/0 1/1 2/0 Grok-4.6 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/1 1/1 2/0 Grok-4.6 Hybrid 2 1/0 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 0/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 Hybrid 2 0/0 0/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 

Mobile 

GPT-6-Astra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 GPT-6-Astra Hybrid 2 0/1 0/1 0/0 1/1 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Luna Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 2/0 GPT-5.6-Terra Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 1/1 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Opus-4.8 Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Code-only 2 2/0 1/0 1/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Sonnet-5 Hybrid 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 1/0 1/0 Claude-Fable-5 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Claude-Fable-5 Hybrid 2 2/0 1/0 0/0 2/0 2/0 Grok-4.6 Code-only 2 2/0 0/0 1/0 1/0 2/0 Grok-4.6 Hybrid 2 2/0 1/0 0/0 1/0 2/0 Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol Hybrid 2 1/1 0/2 0/2 2/0 2/0 

P.3 Observation, editing, and GUI re-verification 

When agents observe relevant behavior. Of the 214 reviewed trajectories, 201 contain substantive edits and 13 contain none. Table 14 separates observation before the first edit from observation at any point in the attempt. Among the 116 edited hybrid trajectories, 83 establish relevant observation before editing, 32 do not, and one has unknown ordering. All 116 acquire relevant runtime information at some point, while six never observe the relevant GUI behavior. Among the 85 edited code-only trajectories, 47 obtain relevant runtime information through non-GUI channels. These counts distinguish an early edit made before observation from an attempt that never acquires relevant evidence. Table 14: Observation and editing in the reviewed trajectories. N/E gives all/edited attempts. Before-edit observation reports yes/no/unknown among the E edited attempts; no-edit attempts are excluded. The last two columns count edited attempts with no relevant runtime information or no relevant GUI observation at any point. 

Domain Condition N/E

Before edit Y/N/U No runtime information No GUI observation Web Code-only 27/27 0/27/0 21 27 Web Hybrid 32/32 19/13/0 0 4Game Code-only 26/24 0/24/0 13 24 Game Hybrid 33/31 14/16/1 0 2DevOps Code-only 19/18 1/17/0 3 18 DevOps Hybrid 33/32 32/0/0 0 0Mobile Code-only 17/16 1/15/0 1 16 Mobile Hybrid 27/21 18/3/0 0 0

62 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Checking the changed application. Post-edit GUI re-verification requires that an edited revision is active, that the relevant behavior is exercised, and that the resulting GUI observation is delivered before submission. Final-edit re-verification additionally requires this sequence after the last substantive edit. The check may reveal success or a remaining defect; its label records whether the agent checked the behavior. Source-level tests and the evaluator’s subsequent checks are recorded separately from this agent-side GUI activity. Table 15 reports weighted outcome rates among the 116 edited hybrid trajectories. Observed final-edit re-verification is associated with higher task success in each domain: 45.8% versus 5.7% on Web, 16.6% versus 12.8% on Game, 68.1% versus 5.9% on DevOps, and 83.7% versus 10.6% on Mobile. Patch-correctness rates show the same ordering; for Web, they are 61.3% versus 5.7%. The table retains unknown check labels, including 13 of the 31 edited Game trajectories for the final-edit measure. These are descriptive associations within the sampled attempts; task difficulty, model, and the trajectory-validation component of task success can also contribute. The small outcome strata support descriptive estimates rather than significance tests or design-based confidence intervals. Table 15: GUI re-verification and repair outcomes among edited hybrid attempts. Y/N/U are raw counts with an observed/absent/unknown GUI check. Task success PU and patch correctness P are inverse-inclusion-weighted percentages, shown separately for Y and N. Unknown check labels are retained in U and excluded from the Y–N comparison. All protocol statuses are included.                                                        

> Task success (%) Patch correctness (%) Domain GUI check Y/N/U YNYNWeb Post-edit 27/5/0 47.6 6.9 61.2 6.9 Web Final-edit 24/7/1 45.8 5.7 61.3 5.7 Game Post-edit 10/9/12 16.6 9.3 16.6 9.3 Game Final-edit 7/11/13 16.6 12.8 16.6 12.8 DevOps Post-edit 23/9/0 68.1 5.9 68.1 5.9 DevOps Final-edit 23/9/0 68.1 5.9 68.1 5.9 Mobile Post-edit 19/2/0 54.8 0.0 54.8 0.0 Mobile Final-edit 10/11/0 83.7 10.6 83.7 10.6

P.4 Interaction counts for successful and unsuccessful repairs 

Image deliveries and GUI actions. Table 16 reports all 1,115 hybrid attempts in the execution collection, separating task successes and failures within each model and domain. We report the median and first and third quartiles, retaining observed zeros. Image counts measure delivered screenshot content: successful image-view results for Web, Game, and DevOps frontier models; pending-image deliveries for Mobile frontier models; and returned image blocks for CLI agents. Repeated transmission of a Mobile image is a separate transport operation and is not added to its delivery count. 

> 63

CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Table 16: Observed image deliveries and GUI actions by repair outcome. Every entry is a median [first quartile, third quartile] over hybrid task successes (S) or failures (F); n gives S/F attempts. An em dash marks an empty success group. Counts are retained-log observations with interface-specific units, defined in the text. Image deliveries GUI actions Model / system n (S/F) S F S F

Web 

GPT-6-Astra 24/12 7.5 [6, 16.8] 19 [14, 26.5] 6 [4, 15.5] 17.5 [12.2, 25.2] GPT-5.6-Sol 21/15 7 [5, 10] 13 [9.5, 18] 6 [4, 8] 12 [8.5, 17] GPT-5.6-Luna 2/34 4 [3.5, 4.5] 2.5 [1, 3] 3.5 [3.2, 3.8] 3.5 [1, 7] GPT-5.6-Terra 5/31 4 [2, 4] 2 [1, 4.5] 3 [2, 4] 3 [1, 5] Claude-Opus-5 20/16 6.5 [5, 11] 20 [15.8, 24] 9.5 [5, 13.2] 36.5 [31.8, 50] Claude-Opus-4.8 10/26 7.5 [5.2, 8.8] 10.5 [4, 15.8] 7 [5, 18.2] 16 [6, 22.8] Claude-Sonnet-5 0/36 – 9.5 [3, 19] – 11 [3, 23.5] Claude-Fable-5 17/19 6 [5, 6] 16 [12, 21] 5 [5, 11] 22 [17.5, 37] Grok-4.6 20/16 12.5 [6.8, 15.2] 18 [12, 21] 11.5 [5.8, 14.2] 17 [11.8, 22.2] Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol 20/16 9 [6, 14.2] 29 [19, 32.5] 8 [5, 13.2] 27.5 [18, 30.8] Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 20/16 7 [5, 9.2] 32 [25.2, 46] 4.5 [3.8, 8] 30 [21.2, 42] 

Game 

GPT-6-Astra 11/18 8 [6, 14] 14.5 [9.5, 27.8] 6 [5, 12] 12 [8.5, 26.8] GPT-5.6-Sol 3/26 1 [1, 2] 2.5 [1, 4.8] 4 [3, 6] 4 [2, 5] GPT-5.6-Luna 2/27 3.5 [2.8, 4.2] 2 [1, 3.5] 13 [10.5, 15.5] 3 [0.5, 7] GPT-5.6-Terra 2/27 4.5 [3.8, 5.2] 3 [1, 4] 5 [3.5, 6.5] 5 [1.5, 8.5] Claude-Opus-5 6/23 19 [12.8, 25.2] 10 [7, 12.5] 17 [14, 22.2] 10 [7, 23.5] Claude-Opus-4.8 6/23 5.5 [4.2, 18.8] 11 [6, 18.5] 5 [4.2, 28.2] 13 [5, 25] Claude-Sonnet-5 1/28 12 [12, 12] 14.5 [9.8, 19.2] 8 [8, 8] 19 [10.8, 44] Claude-Fable-5 5/24 12 [11, 14] 9 [6.8, 14.5] 15 [10, 27] 14 [6.8, 36] Grok-4.6 5/24 12 [10, 25] 8 [2.8, 11.2] 12 [10, 25] 7 [1, 10] Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol 5/24 11 [9, 13] 11 [6, 25.8] 10 [8, 11] 10 [5, 23.8] Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 6/23 24 [18.8, 33.8] 24 [11.5, 34] 21 [14, 28.8] 18 [10, 28] 

DevOps 

GPT-6-Astra 16/4 18 [13.8, 27] 31 [18, 44.2] 13.5 [9.8, 21] 24.5 [13.5, 35.8] GPT-5.6-Sol 11/9 18 [16, 18.5] 15 [11, 19] 17 [15, 17.5] 14 [10, 18] GPT-5.6-Luna 3/17 3 [3, 4] 2 [1, 3] 9 [8, 11] 7 [3, 11] GPT-5.6-Terra 5/15 6 [4, 7] 5 [2.5, 5.5] 6 [5, 7] 4 [3, 8.5] Claude-Opus-5 12/8 20.5 [13.8, 26] 30 [26, 36.2] 25 [13.8, 35.5] 33.5 [26.5, 64] Claude-Opus-4.8 11/9 10 [9.5, 14.5] 12 [9, 27] 12 [10.5, 16] 13 [9, 27] Claude-Sonnet-5 8/12 19.5 [15, 24.8] 28 [24.5, 33] 18.5 [14, 23.5] 28 [20, 34.8] Claude-Fable-5 11/9 13 [10.5, 18.5] 30 [11, 35] 16 [11.5, 29] 50 [12, 60] Grok-4.6 13/7 24 [18, 32] 41 [32, 44.5] 26 [18, 31] 34 [31, 40] Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol 11/9 33 [20, 38.5] 24 [17, 29] 32 [19, 37.5] 23 [16, 28] Claude Code + Claude-Opus-5 13/7 21 [14, 38] 35 [23, 43.5] 17 [9, 26] 32 [20, 33] 

Mobile 

GPT-6-Astra 11/9 41 [35.5, 44.5] 48 [45, 50] 36 [33.5, 38] 46 [44, 47] GPT-5.6-Sol 9/11 37 [33, 39] 54 [52, 55] 36 [32, 38] 54 [53, 55] GPT-5.6-Luna 7/13 21 [19, 21.5] 35 [25, 42] 19 [17.5, 20] 33 [23, 39] GPT-5.6-Terra 7/13 19 [18.5, 20] 27 [23, 32] 17 [16.5, 18] 25 [21, 30] Claude-Opus-4.8 8/12 38.5 [31.5, 45.5] 58 [48.8, 65.5] 37.5 [29.8, 44.8] 58 [48, 65.2] Claude-Sonnet-5 7/13 46 [39.5, 49.5] 54 [52, 55] 45 [39, 49] 52 [52, 55] Claude-Fable-5 8/12 47 [42.5, 53.5] 43.5 [40.2, 52.5] 46 [41.5, 53.5] 41 [28.8, 52.5] Grok-4.6 6/14 49 [48.2, 52.8] 39 [37, 51.5] 48 [46.2, 52] 39 [36, 51.2] Codex + GPT-5.6-Sol 8/12 53.5 [47.5, 66.5] 54.5 [53.8, 64.8] 51.5 [46.5, 61.2] 53.5 [52.8, 63.8] 

Action units. GUI actions use the domain’s recorded action unit: completed browser operations on Web, scaffold actions on Game, non-observation protocol actions on DevOps, and completed non-screenshot GUI actions on Mobile. These units are kept separate by model and interface. 

64 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering 

Interaction quantity and repair outcome. More interaction does not uniformly accompany a successful repair. For GPT-6-Astra on Web, successful attempts have a median of 7.5 image deliveries and 6 GUI actions, compared with 19 deliveries and 17.5 actions for failures. The complete distributions in Table 16 situate such patterns across all models, alongside the behavior-specific re-verification measure above. Counts describe the recorded execution: 80 streams in the full collection lack a recognized terminal marker (4 Web, 71 Game, 4 DevOps, and 1 Mobile), so their observed image counts are lower bounds. Quartiles use linear interpolation at position (n − 1)p in the sorted observations. 

P.5 Patch correctness and paired task outcomes 

Separating repair quality from trajectory validation. We compare the same tasks under code-only and hybrid access in 925 frontier model pairs across 35 model–domain groups. Three groups have lower hybrid task success: GPT-5.6-Luna on Web and Claude-Sonnet-5 on Web and Game. Table 17 separates their passing patches from task success. Across these 101 paired tasks, passing patches increase from 9 to 26, while task successes change from 9 to 3; 23 hybrid passing patches do not satisfy trajectory validation. The seven task-level losses comprise three incorrect patches and four passing patches with invalid tool use; one hybrid win offsets part of these losses. The passing-patch losses involve prohibited HTTP or structured observations. The three incorrect-patch losses involve two masonry-layout repairs and one conditional-physics repair, and also have invalid tool use. This decomposition locates the lower task-success rates in specific repair and tool-use outcomes rather than treating every loss as an implementation failure. It uses the complete paired outcome records and retained patch evidence for the loss cases. Table 17: Matched tasks for model–domain pairs with lower hybrid task success. C/H denotes code-only/hybrid. Wins and losses compare task success on the same task. The final column counts all hybrid passing patches with U = 0, including tasks where code-only also fails.                      

> Domain Model N
> Task C/H Patch C/H Hybrid wins/losses P=1,U=0Web GPT-5.6-Luna 36 4 / 2 4 / 5 0 / 2 3Web Claude-Sonnet-5 36 3 / 0 3 / 18 0 / 3 18 Game Claude-Sonnet-5 29 2 / 1 2 / 3 1 / 2 2
> 65 CUA-SWE: When Computer-Use Agents Meet Visual Software Engineering

P.6 Annotation consistency 

Independent overlap and adjudication. Table 18 reports agreement on the 32 doubly annotated trajectories before adjudication. Agreement is 100% for acquiring relevant runtime information and observing relevant GUI behavior, 90.6% for observation before the first edit, and 87.5% for both GUI re-verification measures. Stage annotations have lower agreement, especially interpretation and diagnosis; many disagreements concern the distinction between not observed and unknown. We therefore report stage labels as exploratory descriptive annotations, alongside unknown counts and the original agreement statistics. Adjudication examined 110 differing fields and changed 17 primary annotations. The second reviewer had prior exposure to earlier population summaries and selected calibration examples, but not to the new primary annotations. The overlap measures reviewer consistency. Substantive-edit occurrence was not separately annotated by the second reviewer, so agreement for that field is unavailable. Table 18: Reviewer agreement before adjudication. The same 32 trajectories receive both annotations. Unknown is an explicit category in nominal Cohen's κ.